The following is a conversation with Ben Gertzel,
one of the most interesting minds
in the artificial intelligence community.
He's the founder of SingularityNet,
designer of OpenCog AI framework,
formerly a director of research
at the Machine Intelligence Research Institute,
and chief scientist of Hanson Robotics,
the company that created the Sophia robot.
He has been a central figure
in the AGI community for many years,
including in his organizing and contributing to the conference
and artificial general intelligence,
the 2020 version of which is actually happening this week,
Wednesday, Thursday and Friday.
It's virtual and free.
I encourage you to check out the talks
including by Yosha Bach from episode 101 of this podcast.
Quick summary of the ads, two sponsors,
The Jordan Harbinger Show and Masterclass.
Please consider supporting this podcast
by going to jordanharbinger.com slash lex
and signing up at masterclass.com slash lex.
Click the links, buy all the stuff.
It's the best way to support this podcast
and the journey I'm on in my research and startup.
This is the artificial intelligence podcast.
If you enjoy it, subscribe on YouTube,
review it with five stars on an Apple podcast,
support it on Patreon or connect with me on Twitter
and Lex Friedman, spelled without the E, just F R I D M A N.
As usual, I'll do a few minutes of ads now
and never any ads in the middle
that can break the flow of the conversation.
This episode is supported by The Jordan Harbinger Show.
Go to Jordanharbinger.com slash Lex.
It's how he knows I sent you.
On that page, there's links to subscribe to it
on Apple podcast, Spotify and everywhere else.
I've been binging on his podcast.
Jordan is great.
He gets the best out of his guests,
dives deep, calls them out when it's needed
and makes the whole thing fun to listen to.
He's interviewed Kobe Bryant, Mark Cuban,
Neil deGrasse Tyson, Karek Asparov, and many more.
This conversation with Kobe is a reminder
how much focus and hard work is acquired for greatness
in sport, business and life.
I highly recommend the episode if you want to be inspired.
Again, go to Jordanharbinger.com slash Lex.
It's how Jordan knows I sent you.
This show sponsored by a masterclass
sign up at masterclass.com slash Lex
to get a discount and to support this podcast.
When I first heard about masterclass,
I thought it was too good to be true.
For 180 bucks a year, you get an all access pass
to watch courses from to list some of my favorites.
Chris Hadfield on Space Exploration,
Neil deGrasse Tyson on Scientific Thinking and Communication,
Will Wright, creator of the greatest city building game ever,
SimCity and Sims on Game Design,
Carlos Santana on Guitar, Karek Asparov,
the greatest chess player ever on chess,
Daniel Negrano on poker, and many more.
Chris Hadfield explaining how rockets work
and the experience of being launched into space alone
is worth the money.
Once again, sign up at masterclass.com slash Lex
to get a discount and to support this podcast.
And now, here's my conversation with Ben Gretzel.
What books, authors, ideas had a lot of impact on you
in your life in the early days?
You know, what got me into AI and science fiction
and such in the first place wasn't a book,
but the original Star Trek TV show,
which my dad watched with me like in its first run.
It would have been 1968, 69 or something.
And that was incredible because every show they visited
a different alien civilization with different culture
and weird mechanisms.
But that got me into science fiction
and there wasn't that much science fiction to watch on TV
at that stage.
So that got me into reading the whole literature
of science fiction, you know,
from the beginning of the previous century until that time.
And I mean, there was so many science fiction writers
who were inspirational to me.
I'd say if I had to pick two,
it would have been Stanislaw Lem, the Polish writer.
Yeah, Solaris.
And then he had a bunch of more obscure writings
on superhuman AIs that were engineered.
Solaris was sort of a superhuman naturally occurring
intelligence, then Philip K. Dick, who, you know,
ultimately my fandom for Philip K. Dick
is one of the things that brought me together
with David Hansen, my collaborator on robotics projects.
So, you know, Stanislaw Lem was very much
an intellectual, right?
So he had a very broad view of intelligence
going beyond the human and into what I would call, you know,
open ended superintelligence.
The Solaris superintelligent ocean was intelligent
in some ways more generally intelligent than people,
but in a complex and confusing way
so that human beings could never quite connect to it,
but it was still probably very, very smart.
And then the Golem IV supercomputer
in one of Lem's books, this was engineered by people,
but eventually it became very intelligent
in a different direction than humans
and decided that humans were kind of trivial
and not that interesting.
So it put some impenetrable shield around itself,
shut itself off from humanity and then issued
some philosophical screed about the pathetic
and hopeless nature of humanity and all human thought
and then disappeared.
Now, Philip K. Dick, he was a bit different,
he was human focused, right?
His main thing was, you know, human compassion
and the human heart and soul are going to be the constant
that will keep us going through whatever aliens we discover
or telepathy machines or super AIs or whatever it might be.
So he didn't believe in reality,
like the reality that we see may be a simulation
or a dream or something else we can't even comprehend,
but he believed in love and compassion
as something persistent through the various simulated realities.
So those two science fiction writers
had a huge impact on me.
Then a little older than that,
I got into Dostoevsky and Friedrich Nietzsche
and Rambo, then a bunch of more literary type writing.
Can we talk about some of those things?
So on the Solaris side, Stanislaus Lem,
this kind of idea of there being intelligences out there
that are different than our own,
do you think their intelligences may be all around us
that we're not able to even detect?
So this kind of idea of maybe you can comment also
on Stephen Wolfram thinking that there's computations
all around us and we're just not smart enough
to kind of detect their intelligence
or appreciate their intelligence.
Yeah, so my friend Hugo DeGaris
who I've been talking to about these things
for many decades since the early 90s,
he had an idea he called SIPI,
the search for intra particulate intelligence.
So the concept there was as AIs get smarter
and smarter and smarter,
you know, assuming the laws of physics
as we know them now are still what these super intelligences
perceived hold and are bound by,
as they get smarter and smarter,
they're gonna shrink themselves littler and littler
because special relativity makes it so that it can communicate
between two spatially distant points.
So they're gonna get smaller and smaller,
but then ultimately what does that mean?
The minds of the super, super, super intelligences,
they're gonna be packed into the interaction
of elementary particles or quarks
or the partons inside quarks or whatever it is.
So what we perceive as random fluctuations
on the quantum or subquantum level
may actually be the thoughts
of the micro, micro, micro, miniaturized super intelligences
because there's no way we can tell random from structured
but with an algorithmic information
more complex than our brains, right?
We can't tell the difference.
So what we think is random
could be the thought processes
of some really tiny super minds.
And if so, there's not a damn thing we can do about it,
except try to upgrade our intelligences
and expand our minds
so that we can perceive more of what's around us.
But if those random fluctuations,
like even if we go to like quantum mechanics,
if that's actually super intelligent systems,
aren't we then part of the soup of super intelligence?
Or aren't we just like a finger of the entirety
of the body of the super intelligent system?
It could be, I mean, a finger is a strange metaphor.
I mean, we...
A finger is dumb is what I mean.
But the finger is also useful
and is controlled with intent by the brain
whereas we may be much less than that, right?
I mean, yeah, we may be just some random epiphenomenon
that they don't care about too much.
Like think about the shape of the crowd
emanating from a sports stadium or something, right?
There's some emergent shape to the crowd, it's there.
You could take a picture of it, it's kind of cool.
It's irrelevant to the main point of the sports event
or where the people are going
or what's on the minds of the people
making that shape in the crowd, right?
So we may just be some semi arbitrary, higher level pattern
popping out of a lower level hyper intelligent self organization.
And I mean, so be it, right?
I mean, that's one thing that...
Still a fun ride.
Yeah, I mean, the older I've gotten,
the more respect I've achieved
for our fundamental ignorance.
I mean, mine and everybody else's.
I mean, I look at my two dogs,
two beautiful little toy poodles
and they watch me sitting at the computer typing.
They just think I'm sitting there wiggling my fingers
to exercise and maybe or guarding the monitor on the desk
that they have no idea that I'm communicating
with other people halfway around the world,
let alone, you know, creating complex algorithms
running in RAM on some computer server
in St. Petersburg or something, right?
Although they're right there,
they're right there in the room with me.
So what things are there right around us
that were just too stupid or closed minded to comprehend?
Probably quite a lot.
Your very poodle could also be communicating
across multiple dimensions
with other beings and you're too unintelligent
to understand the kind of communication mechanism
they're going through.
There have been various TV shows
and science fiction novels,
Poisoning Cats, Dolphins, Mice and whatnot
are actually super intelligences here to observe that.
I would guess as one or the other quantum physics founders
said those theories are not crazy enough to be true.
The reality is probably crazier than that.
Beautifully put.
So on the human side with Philip K. Dick
and in general, where do you fall on this idea
that love and just the basic spirit of human nature
persists throughout these multiple realities?
Are you on the side?
Like the thing that inspires you
about artificial intelligence is it the human side
of somehow persisting through all of the different systems
we engineer or is AI inspire you to create something
that's greater than human, that's beyond human,
that's almost non human?
I would say my motivation to create AGI
comes from both of those directions actually.
So when I first became passionate about AGI
when I was, it would have been two or three years old
after watching robots on Star Trek.
I mean, then it was really a combination
of intellectual curiosity.
Like can a machine really think, how would you do that?
And yeah, just ambition to create something much better
than all the clearly limited
and fundamentally defective humans I saw around me.
Then as I got older and got more enmeshed in the human world
and you know, got married, had children.
So my parents began to age.
I started to realize, well, not only will AGI
let you go far beyond the limitations of the human,
but it could also like stop us from dying and suffering
and feeling pain and tormenting ourselves mentally.
So you can see AGI has amazing capability to do good
for humans as humans alongside with its capability
to go far, far beyond the human level.
So I mean, both aspects are there
which makes it even more exciting and important.
So you mentioned Dostoevsky and Nietzsche.
Where did you pick up from those guys?
I mean.
That would probably go beyond the scope
of a brief interview.
Sure.
I mean, both of those are amazing thinkers
who one will necessarily have a complex relationship with.
So I mean, Dostoevsky on the minus side,
he's kind of a religious fanatic
and he's sort of helped squash the Russian nihilist movement
which was very interesting.
Because what nihilism meant originally
in that period of the mid late 1800s in Russia
was not taking anything fully 100% for grand.
It was really more like what we'd call Bayesianism now
where you don't wanna adopt anything
as a dogmatic certitude and always leave your mind open
and how Dostoevsky parodied nihilism
was a bit different, right?
Dostoevsky parodied is people who believe absolutely nothing.
So they must assign an equal probability weight
to every proposition, which doesn't really work.
So on the one hand, I didn't really agree with Dostoevsky
on his sort of religious point of view.
On the other hand, if you look at his understanding
of human nature and sort of the human mind
and heart and soul, it's really unparalleled.
And he had an amazing view of how human beings
construct a world for themselves based on their own
understanding and their own mental predisposition.
And I think if you look in the brothers Karamazov
in particular, the Russian literary theorist,
Mikhail Bakhtin, wrote about this
as a polyphonic mode of fiction,
which means it's not third person,
but it's not first person from any one person really.
There are many different characters in the novel.
And each of them is sort of telling
part of the story from their own point of view.
So the reality of the whole story
is an intersection, like synergetically,
of the many different characters, world views.
And that really, it's a beautiful metaphor
and even a reflection, I think, of how all of us socially
create our reality.
Like each of us sees the world in a certain way.
Each of us, in a sense, is making the world as we see it
based on our own minds and understanding.
But it's polyphony, like in music,
where multiple instruments are coming together
to create the sound.
The ultimate reality that's created
comes out of each of our subjective understandings,
intersecting with each other.
And that was one of the many beautiful things
in Dostoevsky.
So maybe a little bit to mention,
you have a connection to Russia and the Soviet culture.
I mean, I'm not sure exactly what the nature of the connection
is, but at least the spirit of your thinking is in there.
Oh, yeah.
Well, my ancestry is 3 quarters Eastern European Jewish.
So I'm in my three of my great grandparents
emigrated to New York from Lithuania
and sort of border regions of Poland, which
are in and out of Poland, around the time of World War I.
And they were socialists and communists as well as Jews,
mostly Menshevik, not Bolshevik.
And they fled at just the right time to the US
for their own personal reasons.
And then almost all or maybe all of my extended family
that remained in Eastern Europe was killed either by Hitlens
or Stalin's minions at some point.
So the branch of the family then emigrated to the US
was pretty much the only one.
So how much of the spirit of the people is in your blood still?
When you look in the mirror, do you see what do you see?
I see a bag of meat that I want to transcend
by uploading into some sort of superior reality.
But very clearly, I mean, I'm not religious
in a traditional sense, but clearly the Eastern European
Jewish tradition was what I was raised in.
I mean, my grandfather Leo as well
was a physical chemist to work with Linus Pauling
and a bunch of the other early greats in quantum mechanics.
I mean, he was into x ray diffraction.
He was on the material science side, experimentalist
rather than a theorist.
His sister was also a physicist.
And my father's father, Victor Gertzel,
was a PhD in psychology who had the unenviable job
of giving soccer therapy to the Japanese in internment camps
in the US in World War II, like to counsel them why they
shouldn't kill themselves, even though they had all their stuff
taken away and been imprisoned for no good reason.
So I mean, there is a lot of Eastern European Jewish
tradition in my background.
One of my great uncles was, I guess,
conductor of San Francisco Orchestra.
So there was a lot of Mickey Salkind, a bunch of music
in there also.
And clearly, this culture was all about learning
and understanding the world and also not quite
taking yourself too seriously while you do it, right?
There's a lot of Yiddish humor in there.
So I do appreciate that culture, although the whole idea
that the Jews are the chosen people of God never
resonated with me too much.
The graph of the Gertzel family, I mean,
just the people I've encountered just doing some research
and just knowing your work through the decades,
it's kind of fascinating.
And just the number of PhDs.
Yeah, yeah.
I mean, my dad is a sociology professor
who recently retired from Rutgers University.
But clearly, that gave me a head start in life.
I mean, my grandfather gave me all his quantum mechanics books.
And I was like seven or eight years old.
I remember going through them.
And it was all the old quantum mechanics,
like Rutherford Adams and stuff.
So I got to the part of wave functions,
which I didn't understand, although I was a very bright kid.
And I realized he didn't quite understand it either.
But at least he pointed me to some professor
he knew at U Penn nearby who understood these things, right?
So that's an unusual opportunity for a kid to have, right?
My dad, he was programming FORTRAM when I was 10 or 11
years old on like HP 3000, the mainframes
at Rutgers University.
So I got to do linear regression and FORTRAM
on punch cards when I was in middle school, right?
Because he was doing, I guess, analysis
of demographic and sociology data.
So yes, certainly that gave me a head start
and a push towards science beyond what would have been
the case with many, many different situations.
When did you first fall in love with AI?
Is it the programming side of FORTRAM?
Is it maybe the sociology psychology
that you picked up from your dad or is it the quantum physics?
I fell in love with AI when I was probably three years old
when I saw a robot on Star Trek.
It was turning around in a circle going,
error, error, error, error, because Spock and Kirk
had tricked into a mechanical breakdown
by presenting it with a logical paradox.
And I was just like, well, this makes no sense.
This AI is very, very smart.
It's been traveling all around the universe.
But these people could trick it with a simple logical paradox.
Like, if the human brain can get beyond that paradox,
why can't this AI?
So I felt the screenwriters of Star Trek
had misunderstood the nature of intelligence.
And I complained to my dad about it,
and he wasn't going to say anything one way or the other.
But before I was born, when my dad was at Antioch College
in the middle of the US, he led a protest movement called
SLAM, Student League Against Mortality.
They were protesting against death, wandering
across the campus.
So he was into some futuristic things even back then.
But whether AI could confront logical paradoxes or not,
he didn't know.
But when I, 10 years after that, if something,
I discovered Douglas Hofstadter's book, Gordel Escher Bach.
And that was sort of to the same point of AI and paradox
and logic, because he was over and over with Gordel's
incompleteness theorem.
And can an AI really fully model itself reflexively,
or does that lead you into some paradox?
Can the human mind truly model itself reflexively,
So I think that book, Gordel Escher Bach, which I think
I read when it first came out.
I would have been 12 years old or something.
I remember it was like 16 hour day.
I read it cover to cover, and then reread it.
I reread it after that, because there
was a lot of weird things with little formal systems
in there that were hard for me at the time.
But that was the first book I read
that gave me a feeling for AI as like a practical academic
or engineering discipline that people were working in.
Because before I read Gordel Escher Bach,
I was into AI from the point of view of a science fiction fan.
And I had the idea, well, it may be a long time
before we can achieve immortality in superhuman AGI.
So I should figure out how to build a spacecraft traveling
close to the speed of light, go far away,
then come back to the Earth in a million years
when technology is more advanced, and we
can build these things.
Reading Gordel Escher Bach, well, it didn't all
ring true to me.
A lot of it did, but I could see like there are smart people.
Right now at various universities around me
who are actually trying to work on building what I would now
call AGI, although Hofstadter didn't call that.
So really, it was when I read that book, which would have been
probably middle school, that then I started to think,
well, this is something that I could practically work on.
Yeah, it's supposed to be flying away and waiting it out.
You can actually be one of the people
that actually builds this system.
Yeah, exactly.
And if you think about, I mean, I
was interested in what we'd now call nanotechnology
and in human immortality and time travel,
all the same cool things as every other science fiction
loving kid.
But AI seemed like if Hofstadter was right,
you'd just figure out the right program,
sit there and type it.
Like you don't need to spend stars into weird configurations
or get government approval to cut people up
and fiddle with their DNA or something, right?
It's just programming.
And then, of course, that can achieve anything else.
There's another book from back then,
which was by Gerald Feinbaum, who was a physicist at Princeton.
And that was the Prometheus Project.
And this book was written in the late 1960s,
though I encountered it in the mid-'70s.
But what this book said is in the next few decades,
humanity is going to create superhuman thinking
machines, molecular nanotechnology and human immortality.
And then the challenge we'll have is what to do with it.
Do we use it to expand human consciousness
in a positive direction?
Or do we use it just to further vapid consumerism?
And what he proposed was that the UN
should do a survey on this.
And the UN should send people out to every little village
in remotest Africa or South America
and explain to everyone what technology was going
to bring the next few decades.
And the choice that we had about how to use it.
And let everyone on the whole planet
vote about whether we should develop
super AI nanotechnology and immortality
for expanded consciousness or for rampant consumerism.
And needless to say, that didn't quite happen.
And I think this guy died in the mid-'80s,
so he didn't even see his ideas start
to become more mainstream.
But it's interesting, many of the themes
I'm engaged with now, from AGI and immortality,
even to trying to democratize technology,
as I've been pushing forward singularity
in my work in the blockchain world,
many of these themes were there in Feinbaum's book
in the late 60s even.
And of course, Valentin Turchin, a Russian writer
and a great Russian physicist, who
I got to know when we both lived in New York
in the late 90s and early aughts.
I mean, he had a book in the late 60s in Russia, which
was The Phenomenon of Science, which laid out
all these same things as well.
And Val died in, I don't remember, 2004, 2005,
or something of Parkinson'sism.
So yeah, it's easy for people to lose track now of the fact
that the futurist and the singularitarian advanced
technology ideas that are now almost mainstream
are on TV all the time.
I mean, these are not that new, right?
They're sort of new in the history of the human species.
But I mean, these were all around in fairly mature form
in the middle of the last century,
were written about quite articulately
by fairly mainstream people who were professors
at top universities.
It's just until the enabling technologies
got to a certain point, then you couldn't make it real.
So even in the 70s, I was sort of seeing that
and living through it, right?
From Star Trek to Douglas Hofstadter,
things were getting very, very practical
from the late 60s to the late 70s.
And the first computer I bought, you
could only program with hexadecimal machine code,
and you had to solder it together.
And then a few years later, there's punch cards.
And a few years later, you could get Atari 400
and Commodore VIC 20.
And you could type on a keyboard and program
in higher level languages alongside the assembly language.
So these ideas have been building up a while.
And I guess my generation got to feel them build up,
which is different than people coming into the field now,
for whom these things have just been part
of the ambiance of culture for their whole career,
or even their whole life.
Well, it's fascinating to think about there being
all of these ideas kind of swimming almost with a noise
all around the world, all the different generations,
and then some kind of nonlinear thing
happens where they percolate up and capture
the imagination of the mainstream.
And that seems to be what's happening with AI now.
I mean, Nietzsche, who you mentioned
had the idea of the Superman, right?
But he didn't understand enough about technology
to think you could physically engineer a Superman
by piecing together molecules in a certain way.
He was a bit vague about how the Superman would appear,
but he was quite deep at thinking
about what the state of consciousness
and the mode of cognition of a Superman would be.
He was a very astute analyst of how the human mind constructs
the illusion of a self, how it constructs the illusion
of free will, how it constructs values like good and evil out
of its own desire to maintain and advance its own organism.
He understood a lot about how human minds work.
Then he understood a lot about how post human minds would work.
I mean, this Superman was supposed
to be a mind that would basically have complete root
access to its own brain and consciousness
and be able to architect its own value system and inspect
and fine tune all of its own biases.
So that's a lot of powerful thinking there, which then
fed in and seeded all of postmodern continental philosophy
and all sorts of things have been very valuable in development
of culture and indirectly even of technology.
But of course, without the technology there,
it was all some quite abstract thinking.
So now we're at a time in history when
a lot of these ideas can be made real, which
is amazing and scary, right?
It's kind of interesting to think,
what do you think Nietzsche would,
if he was born a century later or transported through time?
What do you think he would say about AI?
I mean, those are quite different.
If he's born a century later or transported through time.
Well, he'd be on, like, TikTok and Instagram,
and he would never write the great works he's written.
So let's transport him through time.
Maybe also Sprach Zarathustra would be a music video, right?
I mean, who knows?
Yeah, but if he was transported through time,
do you think that that'd be interesting, actually,
to go back?
You just made me realize that it's
possible to go back and read Nietzsche with an eye of,
is there some thinking about artificial beings?
I'm sure that he had inklings.
I mean, with Frankenstein before him,
I'm sure he had inklings of artificial beings
somewhere in the text.
It'd be interesting to see, to try to read his work,
to see if Superman was actually an AGI system,
like if he had inklings of that kind of thinking.
He didn't.
No, I would say not.
I mean, he had a lot of inklings of modern cognitive
science, which are very interesting.
If you look in the third part of the collection that's
been titled The Will to Power, I mean, in book three there,
there's very deep analysis of thinking processes.
But he wasn't so much of a physical tinkerer type guy,
right?
He was very abstract.
Do you think, what do you think about The Will to Power?
Do you think human, what do you think drives humans?
Is it?
Oh, an unholy mix of things.
I don't think there's one pure, simple, and elegant
objective function driving humans by any means.
What do you think?
If we look at, I know it's hard to look at humans
in an aggregate, but do you think overall humans are good?
Or do we have both good and evil within us
that depending on the circumstances,
depending on whatever can percolate to the top?
Good and evil are very ambiguous, complicated,
and in some ways silly concepts.
But if we could dig into your question
from a couple directions.
So I think if you look in evolution,
humanity is shaped both by individual selection
and what biologists would call group selection,
like tribe level selection, right?
So individual selection has driven us
in a selfish DNA sort of way so that each of us
does to a certain approximation what
will help us propagate our DNA to future generations.
I mean, that's why I've got to have four kids so far.
And probably that's not the last one.
On the other hand.
I like the ambition.
Tribal, like group selection, means humans in a way
will do what will advocate for the persistence of the DNA
of their whole tribe or their social group.
And in biology, you have both of these, right?
And you can see, say, an ant colony or a beehive.
There's a lot of group selection in the evolution
of those social animals.
On the other hand, say a big cat or some very solitary animal.
It's a lot more biased toward individual selection.
Humans are an interesting balance.
And I think this reflects itself in what
we would view as selfishness versus altruism to some extent.
So we just have both of those objective functions
contributing to the makeup of our brains.
And then as Nietzsche analyzed in his own way
and others have analyzed in different ways,
I mean, we abstract this as, well, we
have both good and evil within us, right?
Because a lot of what we view as evil
is really just selfishness.
A lot of what we view as good is altruism,
which means doing what's good for the tribe.
And on that level, we have both of those just baked into us.
And that's how it is.
Of course, there are psychopaths and sociopaths
and people who get gratified by the suffering of others.
And that's a different thing.
Yeah, those are exceptions on the whole.
But I think at core, we're not purely selfish.
We're not purely altruistic.
We are a mix.
And that's the nature of it.
And we also have a complex constellation of values
that are just very specific to our evolutionary history.
Like, we love waterways and mountains.
And the ideal place to put a house is in a mountain
overlooking the water, right?
And we care a lot about our kids.
And we care a little less about our cousins
and even less about our fifth cousins.
I mean, there are many particularities to human values,
which whether they're good or evil
depends on your perspective.
Really, I spend a lot of time in Ethiopia in Addis Ababa,
where we have one of our AI development offices
for my singularity net project.
And when I walk through the streets in Addis,
there's people lying by the side of the road,
just living there by the side of the road,
dying probably of curable diseases
without enough food or medicine.
And when I walk by them, I feel terrible.
I give them money.
When I come back home to the developed world,
they're not on my mind that much.
I do donate some.
But I also spend some of the limited money
I have enjoying myself in frivolous ways
rather than donating it to those people who are right now,
like starving, dying, and suffering on the roadside.
So does that make me evil?
I mean, it makes me somewhat selfish and somewhat altruistic.
And we each balance that in our own way, right?
So whether that will be true of all possible AGI's
is a subtler question.
That's how humans are.
So you have a sense, you kind of mentioned
that there's a selfish, I'm not going to bring up
the whole Ayn Rand idea of selfishness
being the core virtue.
That's a whole interesting kind of tangent
that I think we'll just distract ourselves on.
I have to make one amusing comment or comment
that has amused me anyway.
So the, yeah, I have extraordinary negative respect
for Ayn Rand.
Negative, what's a negative respect?
But when I worked with a company called Geneshant,
which was evolving flies to have extraordinary long lives
in Southern California.
So we had flies that were evolved by artificial selection
to have five times the lifespan of normal fruit flies.
But the population of super long lived flies
was physically sitting in a spare room
at an Ayn Rand elementary school in Southern California.
So that was just like, well, if I saw this in a movie,
I wouldn't believe it.
Well, yeah, the universe has a sense of humor
in that kind of way.
That fits in, humor fits in somehow
into this whole absurd existence.
But you mentioned the balance between selfishness
and altruism as kind of being innate.
Do you think it's possible that's kind of an emergent
phenomenon, those peculiarities of our value system?
How much of it is innate?
How much of it is something we collectively,
kind of like a Dostoevsky novel,
bring to life together as a civilization?
I mean, the answer to nature versus nurture is usually both.
And of course it's nature versus nurture
versus self organization, as you mentioned.
So clearly there are evolutionary roots
to individual and group selection
leading to a mix of selfishness and altruism.
On the other hand, different cultures
manifest that in different ways.
Well, we all have basically the same biology.
And if you look at sort of precivilized cultures,
you have tribes like the Yanomamo in Venezuela,
which their culture is focused on killing other tribes.
And you have other Stone Age tribes
that are mostly peaceable and have big taboos against violence.
So you can certainly have a big difference
in how culture manifests these innate
biological characteristics.
But still, you know, there's probably limits
that are given by our biology.
I used to argue this with my great grandparents
who were Marxists actually,
because they believed in the withering away of the state.
Like they believe that, you know,
as you move from capitalism to socialism to communism,
people would just become more social minded
so that a state would be unnecessary
and people would just give,
everyone would give everyone else what they needed.
Now, setting aside that that's not
what the various Marxist experiments on the planet
seemed to be heading toward in practice,
just as a theoretical point,
I was very dubious that human nature could go there.
Like at that time when my great grandparents are alive,
I was just like, you know, I'm a cynical teenager.
I think humans are just jerks.
The state is not gonna wither away.
If you don't have some structure keeping people
from screwing each other over, they're gonna do it.
So now I actually don't quite see things that way.
I mean, I think my feeling now subjectively
is the culture aspect is more significant
than I thought it was when I was a teenager.
And I think you could have a human society
that was dialed dramatically further toward,
you know, self awareness, other awareness,
compassion and sharing than our current society.
And of course, greater material abundance helps.
But to some extent, material abundance
is a subjective perception also
because many Stone Age cultures
perceive themselves as living in great material abundance
that they had all the food and water they wanted.
They lived in a beautiful place,
that they had sex lives, that they had children.
I mean, they had abundance without any factories, right?
So I think humanity probably would be capable
of fundamentally more positive
and joy filled mode of social existence
than what we have now.
Clearly, Marx didn't quite have the right idea
about how to get there.
I mean, he missed a number of key aspects
of human society and its evolution.
And if we look at where we are in society now,
how to get there is a quite different question
because they're very powerful forces pushing people
in different directions
than a positive, joyous, compassionate existence, right?
So if we were tried to, you know,
Elon Musk is dreams of colonizing Mars at the moment.
So maybe you'll have a chance to start a new
civilization with a new governmental system.
And certainly there's quite a bit of chaos.
We're sitting now, I don't know what the date is,
but this is June.
There's quite a bit of chaos
in all different forms going on in the United States
and all over the world.
So there's a hunger for new types of governments,
new types of leadership, new types of systems.
And so what are the forces at play
and how do we move forward?
Yeah, I mean, colonizing Mars, first of all,
it's a super cool thing to do.
We should be doing it.
So you love the idea.
Yeah, I mean, it's more important than making
chocolatey or chocolates and sexier lingerie
and many of the things that we spend a lot more resources on
as a species, right?
So I mean, we certainly should do it.
I think the possible future is in which
a Mars colony makes a critical difference for humanity
are very few.
I mean, I think, I mean,
assuming we make a Mars colony
and people go live there in a couple of decades,
I mean, their supplies are gonna come from Earth,
the money to make the colony came from Earth
and whatever powers are supplying the goods there
from Earth are gonna, in effect,
be in control of that Mars colony.
Of course, there are outlier situations
where Earth gets nuked into oblivion
and somehow Mars has been made self sustaining
by that point.
And then Mars is what allows humanity to persist.
But I think that those are very, very, very unlikely.
Do you don't think it could be
a first step on a long journey?
Of course, it's a first step on a long journey,
which is awesome.
I'm guessing the colonization
of the rest of the physical universe
will probably be done by AGI's
that are better designed to live in space
than by the meat machines that we are.
But I mean, who knows, we may cry or preserve ourselves
in some superior way to what we know now
and shoot ourselves out to Alpha Centaurium beyond.
I mean, that's all cool.
It's very interesting and it's much more valuable
than most things that humanity is spending its resources on.
On the other hand, with AGI,
we can get to a singularity
before the Mars colony becomes sustaining for sure,
possibly before it's even operational.
So your intuition is that that's the problem
if we really invest resources
and we can get to faster than a legitimate,
full like self sustaining colonization of Mars.
Yeah, and it's very clear that we will to me
because there's so much economic value
in getting from their AI toward AGI,
whereas the Mars colony,
there's less economic value
until you get quite far out into the future.
So I think that's very interesting.
I just think it's somewhat off to the side.
I mean, just as I think say,
art and music are very, very interesting
and I wanna see resources go into amazing art and music
being created and I'd rather see that
than a lot of the garbage that society spends their money on.
On the other hand, I don't think Mars colonization
or inventing amazing new genres of music
is not one of the things that is most likely
to make a critical difference in the evolution
of human or non human life in this part of the universe
over the next decade.
Do you think AGI is really?
AGI is by far the most important thing
that's on the horizon.
And then technologies that have direct ability
to enable AGI or to accelerate AGI
are also very important.
For example, say quantum computing.
I don't think that's critical to achieve AGI,
but certainly you could see how
the right quantum computing architecture
could massively accelerate AGI,
similar other types of nanotechnology, right?
Now, the quest to cure aging and end disease
while not in the big picture as important as AGI,
of course, it's important to all of us
as individual humans.
And if someone made a super longevity pill
and distributed it tomorrow, I mean,
that would be huge and a much larger impact
than a Mars colony is gonna have for quite some time.
But perhaps not as much as an AGI system.
No, because if you can make a benevolent AGI,
then all the other problems are solved.
I mean, then the AGI can be,
once it's as generally intelligent as humans,
it can rapidly become massively more generally intelligent
than humans.
And then that AGI should be able to solve
science and engineering problems much better
than human beings, as long as it is, in fact,
motivated to do so.
That's why I said a benevolent AGI.
There could be other kinds.
Maybe it's good to step back a little bit.
I mean, we've been using the term AGI.
People often cite you as the creator,
at least the popularizer of the term AGI,
artificial general intelligence.
Can you tell the origin story of the term?
Sure, sure.
I would say I launched the term AGI upon the world
for what it's worth,
without ever fully being in love with the term.
What happened is I was editing a book,
and this process started around 2001 or two.
I think the book came out 2005, finally.
I was editing a book,
which I provisionally was titling real AI.
And I mean, the goal was to gather together
fairly serious academicish papers
on the topic of making thinking machines
that could really think in the sense like people can,
or even more broadly than people can, right?
So then I was reaching out to other folks
that I had encountered here or there
who were interested in that,
which included some other folks out of the,
who I knew from the transhumist and singularitarian world,
like Peter Vos, who has a company,
AGI Incorporated still in California,
and included Shane Legg,
who had worked for me at my company WebMind
in New York in the late 90s,
who by now has become rich and famous.
He was one of the cofounders of Google DeepMind,
but at that time Shane was,
I think he may have been,
have just started doing his PhD with Marcus Hooter,
who at that time hadn't yet published his book Universal AI,
which sort of gives a mathematical foundation
for artificial general intelligence.
So I reached out to Shane and Marcus and Peter Vos
and Pei Wang, who was another former employee of mine,
who had been Douglas Hofstadter's PhD student,
who had his own approach to AGI.
And a bunch of some Russian folks
reached out to these guys
and they contributed papers for the book.
But that was my provisional title,
but I never loved it because in the end,
I was doing some, what we would now call narrow AI,
as well like applying machine learning to genomics data
or chat data for sentiment analysis.
I mean, that work is real.
And in a sense, it's really AI,
it's just a different kind of AI.
Ray Kurzweil wrote about narrow AI versus strong AI.
But that seemed weird to me
because first of all, narrow and strong are not antennas.
That's right.
But secondly, strong AI was used
in the cognitive science literature
to mean the hypothesis that digital computer AIs
could have true consciousness like human beings.
So there was already a meaning to strong AI,
which was complexly different but related, right?
So we were tossing around on an email list
whether what title it should be.
And so we talked about narrow AI, broad AI, wide AI,
narrow AI, general AI.
And I think it was either Shane Leg or Peter Vos
on the private email discussion we had.
He said, well, why don't we go with AGI,
artificial general intelligence?
And say, Pei Wang wanted to do GAI,
general artificial intelligence,
because in Chinese it goes in that order, right?
But we figured GAI wouldn't work in US culture
at that time, right?
So we went with the AGI,
we used it for the title of that book.
And part of Peter and Shane's reasoning
was you have the G factor in psychology,
which is IQ, general intelligence, right?
So you have a meaning of GI,
general intelligence in psychology.
So then you're looking like artificial GI.
So then we use that for the title of the book.
And so I think I may be both Shane and Peter
think they invented the term,
but then later after the book was published,
this guy, Mark Gubrid came up to me
and he's like, well, I published an essay
with the term AGI in like 1997 or something.
And so I'm just waiting for some Russian to come out
and say they published that in 1953, right?
I mean, that term is not dramatically innovative
or anything.
It's one of these obvious in hindsight things,
which is also annoying in a way
because, you know, Josh Abak, who you interviewed
is a close friend of mine.
He likes the term synthetic intelligence,
which I like much better,
but it hasn't actually caught on, right?
Because I mean, artificial is a bit off to me
because artificial is like a tool or something,
but not all AGIs are gonna be tools.
I mean, they may be now,
but we're aiming toward making them agents rather than tools.
And in a way, I don't like the distinction
between artificial and natural
because I mean, we're part of nature also
and machines are part of nature.
I mean, you can look at evolved versus engineered,
but that's a different distinction.
Then it should be engineered general intelligence, right?
And then general, well,
if you look at Marcus Hooter's book,
universally, what he argues there is, you know,
within the domain of computation theory,
which has limited been interesting.
So if you assume computable environments
and computable reward functions,
then he articulates what would be
a truly general intelligence,
a system called AIXI, which is quite beautiful.
IXI.
IXI, and that's the middle name
of my latest child, actually, is it?
What's the first name?
First name is Quarkxi, QORXI,
which my wife came up with,
but that's an acronym
for quantum organized rational expanding intelligence.
And his middle name is Xiphanes, actually,
which means the former principal underlying AIXI.
But in any case...
You're giving Elon Musk a new child to run for...
Well, I did it first.
He copied me with this new freakish name.
But now if I have another baby,
I'm gonna have to outdo him.
Outdo him.
It's becoming an arms race of weird geeky baby names.
We'll see what the babies think about it, right?
Yeah.
But, I mean, my oldest son, Zarathustra, loves his name,
and my daughter, Sharazad, loves her name.
So far, basically, if you give your kids weird names...
They live up to it.
Well, you're obliged to make the kids weird enough
that they like the names, right?
It directs their upbringing in a certain way.
But, yeah, anyway, I mean,
what Mark has shown in that book
is that a truly general intelligence,
theoretically as possible,
but would take infinite computing power.
So then the artificial is a little off.
The general is not really achievable within physics
as we know it.
And, I mean, physics as we know it may be limited,
but that's what we have to work with now.
Intelligence...
Infinitely general, you mean?
Like, information processing perspective, yeah.
Yeah, intelligence is not very well defined either, right?
I mean, what does it mean?
I mean, in AI now, it's fashionable to look at it
as maximizing an expected reward over the future.
But that sort of definition is pathological in various ways.
And my friend David Weinbaum, a.k.a. Weaver,
he had a beautiful PhD thesis on open ended intelligence,
trying to conceive intelligence in a...
Without a reward.
Yeah, he's just looking at it differently.
He's looking at complex self organizing systems
and looking at an intelligence system
as being one that revises and grows and improves itself
in conjunction with its environment
without necessarily there being one objective function
that's trying to maximize.
Although over certain intervals of time,
it may act as if it's optimizing a certain objective function.
Very much Solaris from Stanislav Lem's novels, right?
So, yeah, the point is artificial, general, and intelligence.
Don't work.
They're all bad.
On the other hand, everyone knows what AI is.
And AGI seems immediately comprehensible
to people with a technical background.
So I think that the term has served as sociological function.
Now it's out there everywhere, which baffles me.
It's like KFC.
I mean, that's it.
We're stuck with AGI probably for a very long time
until AGI systems take over and rename themselves.
Yeah.
And then we'll be biological.
We're stuck with GPUs too,
which mostly have nothing to do with graphics anymore.
I wonder what the AGI system will call us humans.
That was maybe.
Grandpa.
Yeah.
GPs.
Grandpa Processing Unit.
Biological Grandpa Processing Unit.
OK, so maybe also just a comment on AGI
representing, before even the term existed,
representing a kind of community.
You've talked about this in the past.
Sort of, AI is coming in waves.
But there's always been this community
of people who dream about creating
general human level superintelligence systems.
Can you maybe give your sense of the history of this community
as it exists today, as it existed before this deep learning
revolution, all throughout the winters and the summers of AI?
Sure.
First, I would say, as a side point,
the winters and summers of AI are greatly
exaggerated by Americans.
And if you look at the publication record
of the artificial intelligence community,
since, say, the 1950s, you would find a pretty steady growth
in advance of ideas and papers.
And what's thought of as an AI winter or summer
was sort of how much money is the US military pumping
into AI, which was meaningful.
On the other hand, there was AI going on in Germany, UK,
and in Japan, and in Russia, all over the place,
while US military got more and less enthused about AI.
So I mean.
That happened to be, just for people who don't know,
the US military happened to be the main source of funding
for AI research.
So another way to phrase that is it's
up and down of funding for artificial intelligence
research.
And I would say the correlation between funding
and intellectual advance was not 100%, right?
Because I mean, in Russia, as an example, or in Germany,
there was less dollar funding than in the US.
But many foundational ideas were laid out.
But it was more theory than implementation, right?
And US really excelled at sort of breaking through
from theoretical papers to working implementations, which
did go up and down somewhat with US military funding.
But still, I mean, you can look in the 1980s,
Dietrich Drner in Germany had self driving cars
on the Autobahn, right?
And I mean, this was a little early with regard
to the car industry.
So it didn't catch on, such as has happened now.
But I mean, that whole advancement of self driving car
technology in Germany was pretty much
independent of AI military summers and winters in the US.
So there's been more going on in AI globally than not only
most people on the planet realize,
but then most new AI PhDs realize,
because they've come up within a certain subfield of AI
and haven't had to look so much beyond that.
But I would say when I got my PhD in 1989 in mathematics,
I was interested in AI already.
In Philadelphia.
Yeah, I started at NYU, then I transferred to Philadelphia
to Temple University, good old North Philly.
North Philly, yeah.
Yeah, the pearl of the US.
You never stopped at a red light, then,
because you were afraid if you stopped at a red light,
some more car jacking.
So you just drive through every red light.
Every day driving or bicycling to Temple from my house
was like a new adventure.
But yeah, the reason I didn't do a PhD in AI
was what people were doing in the academic AI field then,
was just astoundingly boring and seemed wrongheaded to me.
It was really like rule based expert systems and production
systems.
And actually, I loved mathematical logic.
I had nothing against logic as the cognitive engine for an AI.
But the idea that you could type in the knowledge
that AI would need to think seemed just completely stupid
and wrongheaded to me.
I mean, you can use logic if you want,
but somehow the system has got to be automated.
Learning, right?
It should be learning from experience.
And the AI field then was not interested
in learning from experience.
I mean, some researchers certainly were.
I mean, I remember in mid 80s, I discovered a book
by John Andreas, which was it was about a reinforcement
learning system called Purpose, PURR dash PUSS,
which was an acronym that I can't even remember what
it was for, Purpose anyway.
But that was a system that was supposed to be an AGI.
And basically, by some sort of fancy Markov decision process
learning, it was supposed to learn everything just
from the bits coming into it and learn to maximize its reward
and become intelligent, right?
So that was there in academia back then.
But it was isolated, scattered, weird people.
But all these isolated, scattered, weird people
in that period, I mean, they laid
intellectual grounds for what happened later.
So you look at John Andreas at University of Canterbury
with his Purpose Reinforcement Learning Markov system.
He was the PhD supervisor for John Cleary in New Zealand.
Now, John Cleary worked with me when
I was at Waikato University in 1993 in New Zealand.
And he worked with Ian Whitten there.
And they launched WECA, which was the first open source machine
learning toolkit, which was launched in, I guess,
93 or 94 when I was at Waikato University.
Written in Java, unfortunately.
Written in Java, which was a cool language back then.
I guess it's still, well, it's not cool anymore,
but it's powerful.
I find, like most programmers now,
I find Java unnecessarily bloated.
But back then, it was like Java or C++, basically.
Object oriented, so it's nice.
Java was easier for students.
Amusingly, a lot of the work on WECA
when we were in New Zealand was funded by a US, sorry,
a New Zealand government grant to use machine learning
to predict the menstrual cycles of cows.
So in the US, all the grant funding for AI
was about how to kill people or spy on people.
In New Zealand, it's all about cows or kiwi fruits, right?
Yeah.
So yeah, anyway, I mean, John Andreas
had his probability theory based reinforcement learning
proto AGI, John Cleary was trying to do much more
ambitious probabilistic AGI systems.
Now, John Cleary helped do WECA, which
is the first open source machine learning tool,
gets it a predecessor for TensorFlow and Torch
and all these things.
Also, Shane Legg was at Waikato working with John Cleary
and Ian Whitten and this whole group,
and then working with my own company,
my company WebMind, an AI company I had in the late 90s
with a team there at Waikato University, which
is how Shane got his head full of AGI, which led him to go on
and with Demosis Abbas found DeepMind.
So what you can see through that lineage is in the 80s
and 70s, John Andreas was trying to build probabilistic
reinforcement learning AGI systems.
The technology, the computers just weren't there to support it.
His ideas were very similar to what people are doing now.
But although he's long since passed away
and didn't become that famous outside of Canterbury,
I mean, the lineage of ideas passed on from him
to his students to their students,
you can go trace directly from there to me
and to DeepMind.
So there was a lot going on in AGI that did ultimately
lay the groundwork for what we have today,
but there wasn't a community.
And so when I started trying to pull together an AGI community,
it was in, I guess, the early arts
when I was living in Washington DC
and making a living doing AI consulting for various US
government agencies.
And I organized the first AGI workshop in 2006.
And I mean, it wasn't like it was literally
in my basement or something.
I mean, it was in the conference room at a Marriott in Bethesda.
It's not that edgy or underground, unfortunately.
But still, that's 60 or something.
That's not bad.
I mean, DC has a lot of AI going on.
Probably until the last five or 10 years,
much more than Silicon Valley.
Although it's just quiet because of the nature
of what happens in DC.
Their business isn't driven by PR.
Mostly when something starts to work really well,
it's taken black and becomes even more quiet.
But yeah, the thing is that really
had the feeling of a group of starry eyed mavericks
huddled in a basement plotting how
to overthrow the narrow AI establishment.
And for the first time, in some cases,
coming together with others who shared their passion for AGI
and the technical seriousness about working on it.
And that's very, very different than what we have today.
I mean, now it's a little bit different.
We have AGI conference every year,
and there's several hundred people rather than 50.
Now it's more like this is the main gathering of people
who want to achieve AGI and think that large scale, nonlinear
regression is not the golden path to AGI.
So I mean, it's a annual network.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Well, certain architecture is for learning using neural
networks.
So yeah, the AGI conferences are now
the main concentration of people not obsessed
with deep neural nets and deep reinforcement learning,
but still interested in AGI, not the only ones.
I mean, there's other little conferences and groupings
interested in human level AI and cognitive architectures
and so forth.
But yeah, it's been a big shift.
Like back then, you couldn't really,
it'll be very, very edgy then to give a university department
seminar that mentioned AGI or human level AI.
It was more like you had to talk about something more
short term and immediately practical.
Then in the bar after the seminar,
you could bullshit about AGI in the same breath
as time travel or the simulation hypothesis
or something where it's now AGI is not only
in the academic seminar room, like you
have Vladimir Putin knows what AGI is.
And he's like, Roshan needs to become the leader in AGI.
So national leaders and CEOs of large corporations.
I mean, the CTO of Intel, Justin Ratner,
this was years ago, Singularity Summit conference,
2008 or something.
He's like, we believe Ray Kurzweil,
the Singularity will happen in 2045.
And it will have Intel inside.
I mean, so it's gone from being something
which is the pursuit of crazed mavericks, crackpots,
and science fiction fanatics to being a marketing term
for large corporations and the national leaders, which
is an astounding transition.
But yeah, in the course of this transition,
I think a bunch of subcommittees have formed.
And the community around the AGI conference series
is certainly one of them.
It hasn't grown as big as I might have liked it to.
On the other hand, sometimes a modest sized community
can be better for making intellectual progress also.
You get it with Society for Neuroscience Conference.
You have 35,000 or 40,000 neuroscientists.
On the one hand, it's amazing.
On the other hand, you're not going
to talk to the leaders of the field there
if you're an outsider.
Yeah, in the same sense, the AAAI,
the artificial intelligence, the main kind
of generic artificial intelligence conference,
it's too big.
It's too amorphous.
Like, it doesn't make.
Well, yeah, and NIPP has become a company advertising
outlet now.
So I mean, to comment on the role of AGI
in the research community, I'd still,
if you look at NeurIPS, if you look at CVPR,
if you look at these iClear, AGI is still seen as the outcast.
I would say in these main machine learning,
in these main artificial intelligence conferences
amongst the researchers, I don't know
if it's an accepted term yet.
What I've seen bravely, you mentioned Shane Leg,
is DeepMind and then OpenAI are the two places that are,
I would say, unapologetically so far.
I think it's actually changing, unfortunately.
But so far, they've been pushing the idea
that the goal is to create an AGI.
Well, they have billions of dollars behind them.
And in the public mind, that certainly carries some oomph,
right?
But they also have really strong researchers, right?
They do.
They're great teams.
DeepMind in particular.
And DeepMind has Marcus Hodder walking around.
I mean, there's all these folks who, basically,
their full time position involves dreaming about creating AGI.
I mean, Google Brain has a lot of amazing AGI oriented people
also, and I mean, so I'd say from a public marketing
view, DeepMind and OpenAI are the two large, well funded
organizations that have put the term and concept AGI out there
sort of as part of their public image.
But I mean, there are other groups
that are doing research that seems just as AGI as to me.
I mean, including a bunch of groups in Google's main mountain
view office.
So yeah, it's true.
AGI is somewhat away from the mainstream now.
But if you compare to where it was 15 years ago,
there's been an amazing mainstreaming.
You could say the same thing about super longevity research,
which is one of my application areas that I'm excited about.
I mean, I've been talking about this since the 90s,
but working on this since 2001.
And back then, really, to say you're
trying to create therapies to allow people
to live hundreds or thousands of years,
you were way, way, way, way out of the industry
academic mainstream.
But now Google had Project Calico, Craig Venture,
at Human Longevity Incorporated.
And then once the suits come marching in, right?
I mean, once there's big money in it,
then people are forced to take it seriously,
because that's the way modern society works.
So it's still not as mainstream as cancer research,
just as AGI is not as mainstream as automated driving
or something.
But the degree of mainstreaming that's
happened in the last 10 to 15 years is astounding to those
of us who've been at it for a while.
Yeah, but there's a marketing aspect to the term.
But in terms of actual full force research that's
going on under the header of AGI, it's currently, I would say,
dominated.
Maybe you can disagree, dominated by neural networks
research, that the nonlinear regression, as you mentioned.
What's your sense with OpenCog, with your work in general?
I was a logic based systems and expert systems.
For me, it always seemed to capture
a deep element of intelligence that needs to be there.
Like you said, it needs to learn,
it needs to be automated somehow.
But that seems to be missing from a lot of research currently.
So what's your sense?
I guess one way to ask this question,
what's your sense of what kind of things will an AGI system
need to have?
Yeah, that's a very interesting topic
that I thought about for a long time.
And I think there are many, many different approaches
that can work for getting to human level AI.
So I don't think there's one golden algorithm, one golden
design that can work.
And I mean, flying machines is the much more analogy here,
right?
I mean, you have airplanes, you have helicopters,
you have balloons, you have stealth bombers
that don't look like regular airplanes.
You've got all blimps.
Birds, too.
Birds, yeah, and bugs, right?
Yeah.
And I mean, there are certainly many kinds of flying machines.
And there's a catapult that you can just launch.
There's bicycle powered flying machines, right?
Nice, yeah.
Yeah, so now these are all analogs
will by a basic theory of aerodynamics, right?
Now, so one issue with AGI is we don't yet
have the analog of the theory of aerodynamics.
And that's what Marcus Hoeder was trying
to make with the AXE and his general theory
of general intelligence.
But that theory in its most clearly articulated parts
really only works for either infinitely powerful machines
or almost or insanely impractically powerful machines.
So I mean, if you were going to take a theory based approach
to AGI, what you would do is say, well, let's
take what's called, say, AXE TL, which is Hoeder's AXE
machine that can work on merely insanely much processing
power rather than infinitely much processing.
What does TL stand for?
Time and length.
So you're basically how AXE works basically is each action
that it wants to take before taking that action,
it looks at all its history.
And then it looks at all possible programs
that it could use to make a decision.
And it decides which decision program would have let
it make the best decisions according to its reward
function over its history.
And it uses that decision program
to make the next decision.
It's not afraid of infinite resources.
It's searching through the space of all possible computer
programs in between each action and each next action.
Now, AXE TL searches through all possible computer programs
that have runtime less than T and length less than L,
which is still an impractically humongous space.
So what you would like to do to make an AGI
and what will probably be done 50 years from now
to make an AGI is say, OK, well, we have some constraints.
We have these processing power constraints.
And we have space and time constraints on the program.
We have energy utilization constraints.
And we have this particular class of environments
that we care about, which may be, say,
manipulating physical objects on the surface of the earth,
communicating in human language, whatever
our particular, not annihilating humanity,
whatever our particular requirements happen to be.
If you formalize those requirements
in some formal specification language,
you should then be able to run automated program
specializer on AXE TL, specialize it
to the computing resource constraints
and the particular environment and goal.
And then it will spit out the specialized version of AXE TL
to your resource restrictions in your environment, which
will be your AGI.
And that, I think, is how our super AGI will
create new AGI systems.
But that's a very rush.
It just seems really inefficient.
That's a very Russian approach, by the way.
The whole field of program specialization
came out of Russia.
Can you backtrack?
So what is program specialization?
So it's basically.
Well, take sorting, for example.
You can have a generic program for sorting lists.
But what if all your lists, you care about a length,
10,000 or less?
Got it.
You can run an automated program specializer
on your sorting algorithm.
And it will come up with the algorithm
that's optimal for sorting lists of length 1,000 or less,
or 10,000 or less, right?
It's kind of like, isn't that the kind of the process
of evolution is a program specializer to the environment?
So you're kind of evolving human beings or living?
Oh, exactly.
I mean, your Russian heritage is showing that.
So with Alexander Vityaev and Peter Anokin and so on.
I mean, there's a long history of thinking about evolution
that way also, right?
So my point is that what we're thinking of
is a human level general intelligence.
If you start from narrow AIs, like are being used
in the commercial AI field now, then
you're thinking, OK, how do we make it more and more general?
On the other hand, if you start from AXI or Schmidhuber's
Gertl machine or these infinitely powerful but practically
infeasible AIs, then getting to a human level AGI
is a matter of specialization.
It's like, how do you take these maximally
general learning processes?
And how do you specialize them so that they
can operate within the resource constraints that you have,
but will achieve the particular things that you care about?
Because we humans are not maximally general intelligence.
If I ask you to run a maze in 750 dimensions,
you'll probably be very slow.
Whereas at two dimensions, you're probably way better.
So I mean, because our hippocampus
has a two dimensional map in it, right?
And it does not have a 750 dimensional map in it.
I mean, we are a peculiar mix of generality and specialization.
We'll probably start quite general at birth.
Not obviously still narrow, but more general than we
are at age 20, and 30, and 40, and 50, and 60.
I don't think that.
I think it's more complex than that.
Because in some sense, a young child is less biased,
and the brain has yet to crystallize
into appropriate structures for processing
aspects of the physical and social world.
On the other hand, a young child is very tied
to their sensorium, whereas we can
deal with abstract mathematics, like 750 dimensions.
And the young child cannot, because they
haven't grown what Piaget called the formal capabilities.
They haven't learned to abstract yet, right?
And the ability to abstract gives you
a different kind of generality than what a baby has.
So there's both more specialization
and more generalization that comes with the development
process, actually.
I mean, I guess just the trajectories of the specialization
are most controllable at the young age, I guess,
is one way to put it.
Do you have kids?
No.
They're not as controllable as you think.
So you think it's interesting.
I think, honestly, I think a human adult
is much more generally intelligent than a human baby.
Babies are very stupid.
I mean, they're cute.
They're cute, which is why we put up
with their repetiveness and stupidity.
And they have what the Zen guys would
call a beginner's mind, which is a beautiful thing.
But that doesn't necessarily correlate
with a high level of intelligence.
On the plot of cuteness and stupidity,
there's a process that allows us to put up
with their stupidity as they become more intelligent.
So by the time you're an ugly old man like me,
you've got to get really, really smart to compensate.
To compensate.
OK, cool.
But yeah, going back to your original question,
so the way I look at human level AGI is, yeah,
how do you specialize unrealistically
inefficient superhuman brute force learning processes
to the specific goals that humans need to achieve
and the specific resources that we have?
And both of these, the goals and the resources
and the environments, I mean, all this is important.
And on the resources side, it's important
that the hardware resources we're bringing to bear
are very different than the human brain.
So the way I would want to implement AGI on a bunch of neurons
in a vat that I could rewire arbitrarily
is quite different than the way I
would want to create AGI on, say, a modern server
form of CPUs and GPUs, which in turn may be quite different
than the way I would want to implement AGI on whatever
quantum computer we'll have in 10 years,
supposing someone makes a robust quantum turing machine
or something, right?
So I think there's been co evolution
of the patterns of organization in the human brain
and the physiological particulars of the human brain
over time.
And when you look at neural networks,
that is one powerful class of learning algorithms.
But it's also a class of learning algorithms
that evolve to exploit the particulars of the human brain
as a computational substrate.
If you're looking at the computational substrate
of a modern server farm, you won't necessarily
want the same algorithms that you want on the human brain.
And from the right level of abstraction,
you could look at maybe the best algorithms on the brain
and the best algorithms on a modern computer network
as implementing the same abstract learning
and representation processes.
But finding that level of abstraction
is its own AGI research project then, right?
So that's about the hardware side and the software
side, which follows from that.
Then regarding one of the requirements,
I wrote the paper years ago on what
I called the embodied communication
prior, which was quite similar in intent to Yoshua Benjio's
recent paper on the consciousness prior,
except I didn't want to wrap up consciousness in it,
because to me, the quell your problem
and subjective experience is a very interesting issue also,
which we can chat about.
But I would rather keep that philosophical debate distinct
from the debate of what kind of biases
do you want to put in the general intelligence
to give it human like general intelligence.
And I'm not sure Yoshua Benjio is really
addressing that kind of consciousness.
He's just using the term.
I love Yoshua to pieces like he's by far
my favorite of the lines of deep learning.
But he's such a good, hearted guy
and a great thinker.
Yeah, for sure.
I am not sure he has plumbed to the depths
of the philosophy of consciousness.
No, he's using it as a sexy time.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So when I called it was the embodied communication prior.
Can you maybe explain it a little bit?
Yeah, yeah.
What I meant was, what are we humans of all for?
You can say being human, but that's very abstract, right?
I mean, our minds control individual bodies,
which are autonomous agents, moving around
in a world that's composed largely of solid objects, right?
And we've also evolved to communicate via language
with other solid object agents that
are going around doing things collectively
with us in a world of solid objects.
And these things are very obvious.
But if you compare them to the scope
of all possible intelligences, or even
all possible intelligences that are physically
realizable, that actually constrains things a lot.
So if you start to look at how would you
realize some specialized or constrained
version of universal general intelligence
in a system that has limited memory and limited speed
of processing, but whose general intelligence will
be biased toward controlling a solid object agent, which
is mobile in a solid object world,
for manipulating solid objects and communicating via language
with other similar agents in that same world, right?
Then starting from that, you're starting
to get a requirements analysis for human level
general intelligence.
And then that leads you into cognitive science.
And you can look at, say, what are the different types
of memory that the human mind and brain has?
And this has matured over the last decades.
And I got into this a lot.
So after getting my PhD in math, I
was an academic for eight years.
I was in departments of mathematics, computer
science, and psychology.
When I was in the psychology department,
University of Western Australia, I
was focused on cognitive science of memory and perception.
Actually, I was teaching neural nets and deep neural nets.
And it was multilayer perceptrons, right?
Psychology?
Yeah.
Cognitive science.
It was crossdisclerary among engineering, math,
psychology, philosophy, linguistics, computer science.
But yeah, we were teaching psychology students
to try to model the data from human cognition
experiments using multilayer perceptrons, which
was the early version of a deep neural network.
Very, very, recurrent backprop was very, very slow
to train back then, right?
So this is the study of these constraint systems
that are supposed to deal with physical objects.
So if you look at cognitive psychology,
you can see there's multiple types of memory, which
are to some extent represented by different subsystems
in the human brain.
So we have episodic memory, which shakes into account
our life history and everything that's happened to us.
We have declarative or semantic memory,
which is like facts and beliefs abstracted
from the particular situations that they occurred in.
There's sensory memory, which to some extent
is sense modality specific.
And then to some extent is unified across sense modalities.
There's procedural memory, memory of how to do stuff,
like how to swing the tennis racket, right?
Which is there's motor memory, but it's also
a little more abstract than motor memory.
It involves cerebellum and cortex working together.
And then there's memory linkage with emotion,
which has to do with linkages of cortex and limbic system.
There's specifics of spatial and temporal modeling
connected with memory, which has to do with hippocampus
and thalamus connecting to cortex.
And the basal ganglia, which influences goals.
So we have specific memory of what goals, subgoals,
and subsubgoals we wanted to perceive
in which context in the past.
Human brain has substantially different subsystems
for these different types of memory
and substantially differently tuned learning,
like differently tuned modes of long term potentiation
to do with the types of neurons and neurotransmitters
and the different parts of the brain
correspond to these different types of knowledge.
And these different types of memory and learning
in the human brain, I mean, you can back these all
into embodied communication for controlling agents
and worlds of solid objects.
So if you look at building an AGI system,
one way to do it, which starts more from cognitive science
than neuroscience is to say,
okay, what are the types of memory
that are necessary for this kind of world?
Yeah, yeah, necessary for this sort of intelligence.
What types of learning work well
with these different types of memory?
And then how do you connect all these things together, right?
And of course the human brain did it incrementally
through evolution because each of the subnetworks
of the brain, and when it's not really the lobes
of the brain, it's the subnetworks,
each of which is widely distributed,
which of each of the subnetworks of the brain
co evolved with the other subnetworks of the brain,
both in terms of its patterns of organization
and the particulars of the neurophysiology.
So they all grew up communicating and adapting to each other.
It's not like they were separate black boxes
that were then glommed together, right?
Whereas as engineers, we would tend to say,
let's make the declarative memory box here
and the procedural memory box here
and the perception box here and wire them together.
And when you can do that, it's interesting.
I mean, that's how a car is built, right?
But on the other hand,
that's clearly not how biological systems are made.
The parts co evolved so as to adapt and work together.
So this...
That's by the way how every human engineered system
that flies that were using that analogy
before it's built as well.
So do you find this at all appealing?
Like, there's been a lot of really exciting,
which I find strange that it's ignored
work in cognitive architectures, for example,
throughout the last few decades.
Do you find that...
Yeah, I mean, I had a lot to do with that community.
And Paul Rosenblum, who was one of the...
And John Laird who built the SOAR architecture
are friends of mine.
And I learned SOAR quite well in ACTR
and these different cognitive architectures.
How I was looking in the AI world about 10 years ago
before this whole commercial deep learning explosion was,
on the one hand, you had these cognitive architecture guys
who were working closely with psychologists
and cognitive scientists who had thought a lot about
how the different parts of a human like mine
should work together.
On the other hand, you had these learning theory guys
who didn't care at all about the architecture,
but were just thinking about like,
how do you recognize patterns and large amounts of data?
And in some sense, what you needed to do
was to get the learning that the learning theory guys
were doing and put it together with the architecture
that the cognitive architecture guys were doing
and then you would have what you needed.
Now, unfortunately, when you look at the details,
you can't just do that without totally rebuilding
what is happening on both the cognitive architecture
and the learning side.
So, I mean, they tried to do that in SOAR,
but what they ultimately did is like taking deep neural net
or something for perception
and you include it as one of the black boxes.
Yeah, it becomes one of the boxes.
The learning mechanism becomes one of the boxes
as opposed to a fundamental.
Yeah, that doesn't quite work.
Now, you could look at some of the stuff deep mind has done,
like the differential neural computer or something.
That sort of has a neural net for deep learning perception.
It has another neural net,
which is like a memory matrix.
It stores, say, the map of the London subway or something.
So, probably Demis or Sabus were thinking about
as like part of Cortex and part of hippocampus
because hippocampus has a spatial map
and when he was a neuroscientist,
he was doing a bunch on Cortex hippocampus interconnection.
So there, the DNC would be an example of folks
from the deep neural net world
trying to take a step in the cognitive architecture direction
by having two neural modules that correspond roughly
to two different parts of the human brain
that deal with different kinds of memory and learning.
But on the other hand,
it's super, super, super crude
from the cognitive architecture view, right?
Just as what John Laird and Soar did with neural nets
was super, super crude from a learning point of view
because the learning was like off to the side
not affecting the core representations, right?
And when you weren't learning the representation,
you were learning the data that feeds into the rep.
You were learning abstractions of perceptual data
to feed into the representation that was not learned, right?
So yeah, this was clear to me a while ago
and one of my hopes with the AGI community
was to sort of bring people
from those two directions together.
That didn't happen much in terms of...
Not yet.
Or what I was gonna say is it didn't happen
in terms of bringing like the lines
of cognitive architecture together
with the lines of deep learning.
It did work in the sense that a bunch of younger researchers
have had their heads filled with both of those ideas.
This comes back to a saying my dad
who was a university professor often quoted to me
which was a science advances one funeral at a time.
Which I'm trying to avoid.
Like I'm 53 years old
and I'm trying to invent amazing weird ass new things
that nobody ever thought about
which we'll talk about in a few minutes.
But there is that aspect, right?
Like the people who've been at AI a long time
and have made their career at developing one aspect
like a cognitive architecture or a deep learning approach.
It can be hard once you're old
and have made your career doing one thing.
It can be hard to mentally shift gears.
I mean, I try quite hard to remain flexible minded.
You've been successful somewhat in changing,
maybe have you changed your mind on some aspects
of what it takes to build an AGI?
Like tech technical things.
The hard part is that the world doesn't want you to.
The world or your own brain?
The world, well, that one point
is that your brain doesn't want to.
The other part is that the world doesn't want you to.
Like the people who have followed your ideas
get mad at you if you change your mind.
And the media wants to pigeonhole you
as an avatar of a certain idea.
But yeah, I've changed my mind on a bunch of things.
I mean, when I started my career,
I really thought quantum computing would be necessary
for AGI and I doubt it's necessary now,
although I think it will be a super major enhancement.
But I mean, I'm also, I'm now in the middle
of embarking on a complete rethink
and rewrite from scratch of our OpenCog AGI system,
together with Alexei Podopov and his team in St. Petersburg
who's working with me in SingularityNet.
So now we're trying to like go back to basics,
take everything we learned from working
with the current OpenCog system,
take everything everybody else has learned
from working with their Proto AGI systems
and design the best framework for the next stage.
And I do think there's a lot to be learned
from the recent successes with deep neural nets
and deep reinforcement systems.
I mean, people made these essentially trivial systems
work much better than I thought they would.
And there's a lot to be learned from that.
And I want to incorporate that knowledge appropriately
in our OpenCog 2.0 system.
On the other hand, I also think current deep neural net
architectures as such will never get you anywhere near AGI.
So I think you want to avoid the pathology
of throwing the baby out with the bathwater
and like saying, well, these things are garbage
because foolish journalists overblow them
as being the path to AGI
and a few researchers overblow them as well.
There's a lot of interesting stuff to be learned there
even though those are not the golden path.
So maybe this is a good chance to step back.
You mentioned OpenCog 2.0, but...
Go back to OpenCog 0.0, which exists now.
Alpha, yeah.
Yeah, maybe talk to the history of OpenCog
and you're thinking about these ideas.
I would say OpenCog 2.0 is a term
we're throwing around sort of tongue in cheek
because the existing OpenCog system that we're working on now
is not remotely close to what we'd consider,
we'd consider a 1.0, right?
I mean, it's been around what, 13 years or something,
but it's still an early stage research system, right?
And actually we're going back to the beginning
in terms of theory and implementation
because we feel like that's the right thing to do,
but I'm sure what we end up with
is going to have a huge amount in common
with the current system.
I mean, we all still like the general approach.
So there's...
So first of all, what is OpenCog?
Sure, OpenCog is an open source software project
that I launched together with several others in 2008
and probably the first code written toward that
was written in 2001 or two or something
that was developed as a proprietary code base
within my AI company, NovaMente LLC.
Then we decided to open source it in 2008,
cleaned up the code throughout some things,
added some new things and...
What language is it written in?
It's C++.
Primarily there's a bunch of scheme as well,
but most of it's C++.
And it's separate from that something
we'll also talk about is SingularityNet.
So it was born as a non networked thing.
Correct, correct.
Well, there are many levels of networks
involved here, right?
No connectivity to the internet.
Or no.
At birth.
Yeah, I mean, SingularityNet is a separate project
and a separate body of code.
And you can use SingularityNet as part of the infrastructure
for a distributed OpenCog system,
but there are different layers.
Yeah.
Got it.
So OpenCog on the one hand as a software framework
could be used to implement a variety
of different AI architectures and algorithms.
But in practice, there's been a group of developers
which I've been leading together
with Linus Vepstas, Neil Geisweiler and a few others
which have been using the OpenCog platform
and infrastructure to implement certain ideas
about how to make an AGI.
So there's been a little bit of ambiguity
about OpenCog, the software platform
versus OpenCog, the AGI design.
Because in theory, you could use that software
to do, you could use it to make a neural net.
You could use it to make a lot of different AGI.
What kind of stuff does the software platform provide?
Like in terms of utilities, those like what?
Yeah, let me first tell about OpenCog
as a software platform.
And then I'll tell you the specific AGI R&D
we've been building on top of it.
So the core component of OpenCog is a software platform
is what we call the Atom Space,
which is a weighted labeled hypergraph.
A T O M Atom Space.
Atom Space, yeah, yeah, not Atom,
like Adam and Eve, although that would be cool too.
Yeah, so you have a hypergraph, which is like,
so a graph in this sense is a bunch of nodes
with links between them.
A hypergraph is like a graph,
but links can go between more than two nodes.
So you have a link between three nodes.
And in fact, OpenCog's Atom Space
would properly be called a metagraph
because you can have links pointing to links
or you could have links pointing to whole subgraphs, right?
So it's an extended hypergraph or a metagraph.
Is metagraph a technical term?
It is now a technical term.
Interesting.
But I don't think it was yet a technical term
when we started calling this a generalized hypergraph.
But in any case, it's a weighted labeled
generalized hypergraph or weighted labeled metagraph.
The weights and labels mean that the nodes and links
can have numbers and symbols attached to them.
So they can have types on them.
They can have numbers on the represent,
say a truth value or an importance value
for a certain purpose.
And of course, like with all things,
you can reduce that to a hypergraph
and then the hypergraph can be reduced to a graph.
And you could reduce a graph to an adjacency matrix.
So I mean, there's always multiple representations.
But there's a layer of representation
that seems to work well here.
Got it.
Right, right, right.
And so similarly, you could have a link to a whole graph
because a whole graph could represent, say,
a body of information.
And I could say, I reject this body of information.
Then one way to do that is make that link
go to that whole subgraph representing
the body of information.
I mean, there are many alternate representations.
But that's anyway, what we have an open cog.
We have an atom space, which is this weighted labeled
generalized hypergraph, knowledge store.
It lives in RAM.
There's also a way to back it up to disk.
There are ways to spread it among multiple different machines.
Then there are various utilities for dealing with that.
So there's a pattern matcher, which
lets you specify a sort of abstract pattern
and then search through a whole atom space
with labeled hypergraph to see what subhypergraphs may
match that pattern, for an example.
So then there's something called the cog server
in open cog, which lets you run a bunch of different agents
or processes in a scheduler.
And each of these agents, basically,
it reads stuff from the atom space
and it writes stuff to the atom space.
So this is sort of the basic operational model.
That's the software framework.
Right.
And of course, there's a lot there just
from a scalable software engineering standpoint.
So you could use this, I don't know if you've,
have you looked into the Steven Wolframs physics project
recently with the hypergraphs and stuff?
Could you theoretically use the software framework to play?
You certainly could, although Wolfram would rather
die than use anything but Mathematica for his work.
Yeah, but there's a big community of people
who would love integration.
And like you said, the young minds
love the idea of integrating, of connecting things.
That's right.
And I would add on that note, the idea
of using hypergraph type models in physics is not very new.
Like if you look at.
The Russians did it first.
Well, I'm sure they did.
And a guy named Ben Dribis, who's a mathematician,
a professor in Louisiana or somewhere,
had a beautiful book on quantum sets and hypergraphs
and algebraic topology for discrete models of physics
and carried it much farther than Wolfram has.
But he's not rich and famous.
So it didn't get in the headlines.
But yeah, Wolfram aside, yeah, certainly, that's
a good way to put it.
The whole OpenCog framework, you could
use it to model biological networks
and simulate biology processes.
You could use it to model physics on discrete graph
models of physics.
So you could use it to do, say, biologically realistic
neural networks, for example.
And so that's a framework.
What do agents and processes do?
Do they grow the graph?
Do they, what kind of computations
just to get a sense of this?
So in theory, they could do anything they want to do.
They're just C++ processes.
On the other hand, the computation framework
is sort of designed for agents where most of their processing
time is taken up with reads and writes to the atmosphere.
And so that's a very different processing model
than, say, the matrix multiplication based model
as underlies most deep learning systems.
So you could create an agent that just
factored numbers for a billion years.
It would run within the OpenCog platform,
but it would be pointless.
I mean, the point of doing OpenCog is
because you want to make agents that are cooperating
via reading and writing into this weighted labeled
hypergraph, and that has both cognitive architecture
importance, because then this hypergraph is being used
as a sort of shared memory among different cognitive
processes, but it also has software and hardware
implementation implications.
Because current GPU architectures
are not so useful for OpenCog, whereas a graph chip would
be incredibly useful.
And I think GraphCore has those now,
but they're not ideally suited for this.
But I think in the next, let's say, three to five years,
we're going to see new chips where a graph is put on the chip
and the back and forth between multiple processes acting
SIMD and MIMD on that graph is going to be fast.
And then that may do for OpenCog type architectures
what GPUs did for deep neural architecture.
It's a small tangent.
Can you comment on thoughts about neuromorphic computing?
So hardware implementations of all these different kind of,
are you excited by that possibility?
I'm excited by graph processors, because I
think they can massively speed up OpenCog, which
is a class of architectures that I'm working on.
I think if, in principle, neuromorphic computing
should be amazing, I haven't yet been fully
sold on any of the systems that are out.
They're like, memristors should be amazing too, right?
So a lot of these things have obvious potential,
but I haven't yet put my hands on a system that
seemed to manifest that.
Yeah, Mark's system should be amazing,
but the current system has not been great.
For example, if you wanted to make
a biologically realistic hardware neural network,
like taking, making a circuit in hardware
that emulated like the HodgkinHuxley equation,
or the Izhekevich equation, like differential equations
for biologically realistic neuron,
and putting that in hardware on the chip,
that would seem that it would make more feasible to make
a large scale, truly biologically realistic neural network.
Now, what's been done so far is not like that.
So I guess, personally, as a researcher,
I mean, I've done a bunch of work in cognitive neural,
sorry, in computational neuroscience,
where I did some work with IRPA in DC Intelligence Advanced
Research Project Agency.
We were looking at, how do you make
a biologically realistic simulation of seven
different parts of the brain cooperating with each other,
using realistic nonlinear dynamical models of neurons?
And how do you get that to simulate
what's going on in the mind of a geoint intelligence
analyst while they're trying to find terrorists on a map,
right?
So if you want to do something like that,
having neuromuffer hardware that really let you simulate
like a realistic model of the neuron would be amazing.
But that's sort of with my computational neuroscience
had on, right?
With an AGI had on, I'm just more interested
in these hypergraph knowledge representation
based architectures, which would benefit more
from various types of graph processors.
Because the main processing bottleneck
is reading, writing to RAM.
It's reading, writing to the graph in RAM.
The main processing bottleneck for this kind of proto AGI
architecture is not multiplying matrices.
And for that reason, GPUs, which are really good at multiplying
matrices, don't apply as well.
There are frameworks like Gunrock and others
that try to boil down graph processing to matrix operations.
And they're cool, but you're still
putting a square peg into a round hole in a certain way.
The same is true.
I mean, current quantum machine learning, which is very cool.
It's also all about how to get matrix and vector operations
in quantum mechanics.
And I see why that's natural to do.
I mean, quantum mechanics is all unitary matrices
and vectors, right?
On the other hand, you could also
try to make graph centric quantum computers, which
I think is where things will go.
And then we can make take the OpenCog implementation layer,
implement it in a uncollapsed state
inside a quantum computer.
But that may be the singularity squared, right?
I'm not sure we need that to get to human level.
Singularity squared.
Human level.
That's already beyond the first singularity.
Yeah, let's go back to OpenCog.
No, no.
Yeah, and the hypergraph and OpenCog.
That's the software framework, right?
So the next thing is our cognitive architecture
tells us particular algorithms to put there.
Got it.
Can we backtrack on the kind of, is this graph designed?
Is it, in general, supposed to be sparse?
And the operations constantly grow and change the graph?
Yeah, the graph is sparse.
But is it constantly adding links and so on?
It is a self modifying hypergraph.
So it's not, so the write and read operations you're referring
to, this isn't just a fixed graph to which you change the way.
It's a constantly growing graph.
Yeah, that's true.
So it is different model than, say,
current deep neural nets and have a fixed neural architecture.
And you're updating the weights.
Although there have been cascade correlational neural net
architectures that grow new nodes and links.
But the most common neural architectures now
have a fixed neural architecture.
You're updating the weights.
And in OpenCog, you can update the weights.
And that certainly happens a lot.
But adding new nodes, adding new links,
removing nodes and links is an equally critical part
of the system's operations.
Got it.
So now when you start to add these cognitive algorithms
on top of this OpenCog architecture,
what does that look like?
So what?
Yeah, so within this framework, then,
creating a cognitive architecture is basically two things.
It's choosing what type system you
want to put on the nodes and links in the hypergraph,
what types of nodes and links you want.
And then it's choosing what collection of agents,
what collection of AI algorithms or processes
are going to run to operate on this hypergraph.
And of course, those two decisions
are closely connected to each other.
So in terms of the type system, there
are some links that are more neural net like.
They just have weights to get updated by heavy and learning
and activation spreads along them.
There are other links that are more logic like and nodes
that are more logic like.
So you could have a variable node.
And you can have a node representing
a universal or existential quantifier
as in predicate logic or term logic.
So you can have logic like nodes and links.
Or you can have neural like nodes and links.
You can also have procedure like nodes and links
as in, say, combinator logic or lambda
calculus representing programs.
So you can have nodes and links representing
many different types of semantics, which
means you could make a horrible, ugly mess.
Or you could make a system where these different types of knowledge
all interpenetrate and synergize with each other
beautifully, right?
So the hypergraph can contain programs.
Yeah, it can contain programs.
Although in the current version, it
is a very inefficient way to guide the execution of programs,
which is one thing that we are aiming
to resolve with our rewrite of the system now.
So what do you use the most beautiful aspect of OpenCog?
Just to you personally, some aspect
that captivates your imagination from beauty or power.
What fascinates me is finding a common representation that
underlies abstract declarative knowledge
and sensory knowledge and movement knowledge
and procedural knowledge and episodic knowledge.
Finding the right level of representation
where all these types of knowledge
are stored in a sort of universal and interconvertible,
yet practically manipulable way, right?
So to me, that's the core.
Because once you've done that, then the different learning
algorithms can help each other out.
Like what you want is if you have a logic engine that
helps with declarative knowledge and you have a deep neural net
that gathers perceptual knowledge and you
have, say, an evolutionary learning system that
learns procedures, you want these to not only interact
on the level of sharing results and passing inputs
and outputs to each other, you want the logic engine, when
it gets stuck, to be able to share its intermediate state
with the neural net and with the evolutionary learning
algorithm so that they can help each other out of bottlenecks
and help each other solve combinatorial explosions
by intervening inside each other's cognitive processes.
But that can only be done if the intermediate state
of a logic engine, evolutionary learning engine,
and a deep neural net are represented in the same form.
And that's what we figured out how
to do by putting the right type system on top of this weighted
labeled hypergraph.
So is there, can you maybe elaborate
on what are the different characteristics of a type
system that can coexist amongst all these different kinds
of knowledge that needs to be represented?
And is, I mean, like, is it hierarchical?
Just any kind of insights you can give on that kind of type?
Yeah, yeah.
So this gets very nitty gritty and mathematical, of course.
But one key part is switching from predicate logic
to term logic.
What is predicate logic?
What is term logic?
So term logic wasn't done by Aristotle,
or at least that's the oldest recollection
we have of it.
But term logic breaks down basic logic
into basically simple links between nodes,
like an inheritance link between node A and node B.
So in term logic, the basic deduction operation
is A implies B, B implies C, therefore A implies C.
Whereas in predicate logic, the basic operation
is modus ponens, like A, A implies B, therefore B.
So it's a slightly different way of breaking down logic.
But by breaking down logic into term logic,
you get a nice way of breaking logic down into nodes and links.
So your concepts can become nodes.
The logical relations become links.
And so then inference is like, so if this link is A implies B,
this link is B implies C, then deduction
builds a link A implies C. And your probabilistic algorithm
can assign a certain weight there.
Now, you may also have a Hebbian neural link from A to C,
which is the degree to which A being the focus of attention
should make B the focus of attention.
So you could have then a neural link,
and you could have a symbolic logical inheritance
link in your term logic.
And they have separate meaning, but they
could be used to guide each other as well.
Like, if there is a large amount of neural weight
on the link between A and B, that may direct your logic
engine to think about, well, what is the relation?
Are they similar?
Is there an inheritance relation?
Are they similar in some context?
On the other hand, if there's a logical relation between A and B,
that may direct your neural component to think, well,
when I'm thinking about A, should I
be directing some attention to B also?
Because there's a logical relation.
So in terms of logic, there's a lot of thought
that went into how do you break down logic relations,
including basic sort of propositional logic relations
as Aristotle in term logic deals with,
and then quantifier logic relations also.
How do you break those down elegantly into a hypergraph?
Because I mean, you can boil logic expression
and do a graph in many different ways.
Many of them are very ugly, right?
We tried to find elegant ways of sort of hierarchically breaking
down complex logic expression into nodes and links
so that if you have, say, different nodes representing
Ben, AI, Lex, interview, or whatever,
the logic relations between those things
are compact in the node and link representation
so that when you have a neural net acting on those same nodes
and links, the neural net and the logic engine
can sort of interoperate with each other.
And also interpretable by humans.
Is that an important?
That's tough.
In simple cases, it's interpretable by humans.
But honestly, I would say logic systems
give more potential for transparency
and comprehensibility than neural net systems,
but you still have to work at it.
Because I mean, if I show you a predicate logic proposition
with like 500 nested universal and existential quantifiers
and 217 variables, that's no more comprehensible than the weight
metrics of a neural network, right?
So I'd say the logic expressions and AI
learns from its experience are mostly totally opaque
to human beings and maybe even harder to understand
than a neural net.
Because I mean, when you have multiple nested quantifier
bindings, it's a very high level of abstraction.
There is a difference, though, in that within logic,
it's a little more straightforward
to pose the problem of normalize this
and boil this down to a certain form.
I mean, you can do that in neural nets, too.
Like you can distill a neural net to a simpler form,
but that's more often done to make a neural net that'll
run on an embedded device or something.
It's harder to distill a net to a comprehensible form than is
to simplify a logic expression to a comprehensible form,
but it doesn't come for free.
Like what's in the AI's mind is incomprehensible to a human
unless you do some special work to make it comprehensible.
So on the procedural side, there's
some different and interesting voodoo there.
I mean, if you're familiar in computer science,
there's something called the Curry Howard
correspondence, which is a one to one mapping between proofs
and programs.
So every program can be mapped into a proof.
Every proof can be mapped into a program.
You can model this using category theory
in a bunch of nice math.
But we want to make that practical, right?
So that if you have an executable program
that moves a robot's arm or figures out
in what order to say things in a dialogue, that's
a procedure represented in OpenCog's hypergraph.
But if you want to reason on how to improve that procedure,
you need to map that procedure into logic using Curry Howard
isomorphism so that then the logic engine can reason
about how to improve that procedure
and then map that back into the procedural representation that
is efficient for execution.
So again, that comes down to not just
can you make your procedure into a bunch of nodes and links?
Because I mean, that can be done trivially.
A C++ compiler has nodes and links inside it.
Can you boil down your procedure into a bunch of nodes
and links in a way that's like hierarchically decomposed
and simple enough?
They can reason about it.
Yeah, yeah.
Given the resource constraints at hand,
you can map it back and forth to your term logic fast enough
and without having a bloated logic expression, right?
So there's just a lot of nitty gritty particulars there.
But by the same token, if you ask a chip designer,
like, how do you make the Intel i7 chip so good?
There's a long list of technical answers there,
which will take a while to go through, right?
And this has been decades of work.
I mean, the first AI system of this nature
I tried to build was called WebMind in the mid 1990s.
And we had a big graph, a big graph operating in RAM
implemented with Java 1.1, which is a terrible, terrible
implementation idea.
And then each node had its own processing.
So like there, the core loop loop through all nodes
in the network and let each node enact what
its little thing was doing.
And we had logic and neural nets in there
but an evolutionary learning.
But we hadn't done enough of the math
to get them to operate together very cleanly.
So it was really, it was quite a horrible mess.
So as well as shifting and implementation,
where the graph is its own object
and the agents are separately scheduled,
we've also done a lot of work on how
do you represent programs, how do you represent procedures,
how do you represent genotypes for evolution in a way
that the interoperability between the different types
of learning associated with these different types of knowledge
actually works.
And that's been quite difficult.
It's taken decades and it's totally off to the side
of what the commercial mainstream of the AI field
is doing, which isn't thinking about representation at all,
really, although you could see, like in the DNC,
they had to think a little bit about how
do you make representation of a map in this memory matrix
work together with the representation needed for,
say, visual pattern recognition in the hierarchical neural
network.
But I would say we have taken that direction
of taking the types of knowledge you
need for different types of learning,
like declarative, procedural, attentional,
and how do you make these types of knowledge
represent in a way that allows cross learning
across these different types of memory.
We've been prototyping and experimenting
with this within OpenCog and before that webmind
since the mid 1990s.
Now, disappointingly, to all of us,
this has not yet been cashed out in an AGI system.
I mean, we've used this system within our consulting business.
So we've built natural language processing and robot control
and financial analysis.
We've built a bunch of vertical market specific proprietary AI
projects that use OpenCog on the back end.
But we haven't.
That's not the AGI goal.
It's interesting, but it's not the AGI goal.
So now what we're looking at with our rebuild of the system.
2.0.
Yeah, we're also calling it True AGI.
So we're not quite sure what the name is yet.
We made a website for TrueAGI.io,
but we haven't put anything on there yet.
We may come up with an even better name.
It's kind of like the real AI starting point for your AGI
book.
Yeah, but I like True better, because True has like,
you can be true hearted, right?
You can be true to your girlfriend.
So True has a number.
And it also has logic in it, right?
Because logic is a key point.
I like it, yeah.
So yeah, with the True AGI system,
we're sticking with the same basic architecture,
but we're trying to build on what we've learned.
And one thing we've learned is that we need type checking
among dependent types to be much faster
and among probabilistic dependent types to be much faster.
So as it is now, you can have complex types
on the nodes and links.
But if you want to put, like if you
want types to be first class citizens,
so that you can have the types can be variables,
and then you do type checking among complex, higher order
types, you can do that in the system now, but it's very slow.
This is stuff like it's done in cutting edge program languages
like Agda or something.
These obscure research languages.
On the other hand, we've been doing a lot of time
together deep neural nets with symbolic learning.
So we did a project for Cisco, for example,
which was on this was street scene analysis,
but they had deep neural models for a bunch of cameras
watching street scenes.
But they trained a different model for each camera,
because they couldn't get the transfer
learning to work between camera A and camera B.
So we took what came out of all the deep neural models
for the different cameras.
We fed it into an open cog symbolic representation.
Then we did some pattern mining and some reasoning
on what came out of all the different cameras
within the symbolic graph.
And that worked well for that application.
I mean, Hugo Latapie from Cisco gave a talk touching on that
at last year's AGR conference.
It was in Shenzhen.
On the other hand, we learned from there,
it was kind of clunky to get the deep neural models to work
well with the symbolic system, because we were using Torch.
And Torch keeps a sort of computation graph,
but you needed real time access to that computation graph
within our hypergraph.
And we certainly did it.
Alexei Podapov, who leads our St. Petersburg team,
wrote a great paper on cognitive modules in open cog,
explaining sort of how do you deal with the Torch compute
graph inside open cog.
But in the end, we realized that just hadn't been one
of our design thoughts when we built open cog, right?
So between wanting really fast dependent type checking
and wanting much more efficient interoperation
between the computation graphs of deep neural net frameworks
and open cogs hypergraph.
And adding on top of that, wanting to more effectively
run an open cog hypergraph distributed
across RAM in 10,000 machines, which
is we're doing dozens of machines now,
but it's just not, we didn't architect it
with that sort of modern scalability in mind.
So these performance requirements
are what have driven us to want to rearchitect the base.
But the core AGI paradigm doesn't really change.
Like the mathematics is the same.
It's just we can't scale to the level
that we want in terms of distributed processing
or speed of various kinds of processing
with the current infrastructure that
was built in the phase 2001 to 2008, which is hardly shocking.
Well, the three things you mentioned are really interesting.
So what do you think about, in terms of interoperability,
communicating with computational graph of neural networks?
What do you think about the representations
that neural networks form?
They're bad, but there's many ways
that you could deal with that.
So I've been wrestling with this a lot in some work
on supervised grammar induction.
And I have a simple paper on that.
They'll give it the next AGI conference, the online portion
of which is next week, actually.
What is grammar induction?
So this isn't AGI either, but it's sort of on the verge
between NERAI and AGI or something.
Unsupervised grammar induction is the problem.
Throw your AI system a huge body of text
and have it learn the grammar of the language that
produced that text.
So you're not giving it labeled examples.
So you're not giving it like 1,000 sentences
where the parses were marked up by graduate students.
So it's just got to infer the grammar from the text.
It's like the Rosetta Stone, but worse, because you only
have the one language.
And you have to figure out what is the grammar.
So that's not really AGI because the way a human learns
language is not that.
I mean, we learn from language that's used in context.
So it's a social embodied thing.
We see how a given sentence is grounded in observation.
There's an interactive element, I guess.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
On the other hand, so I'm more interested in that.
I'm more interested in making an AGI system learn language
from its social and embodied experience.
On the other hand, that's also more of a pain to do.
And that would lead us into Hanson Robotics
and their robotics work, I've known which we'll talk about
in a few minutes.
But just as an intellectual exercise,
as a learning exercise, trying to learn grammar
from a corpus is very, very interesting.
And that's been a field in AI for a long time.
No one can do it very well.
So we've been looking at transformer neural networks
and tree transformers, which are amazing.
These came out of Google Brain, actually.
And actually, on that team was Lucas Kaiser,
who used to work for me in the period 2005 through 2008
or something.
So it's been fun to see my former AGI employees disperse
and do all these amazing things.
Way too many sucked into Google, actually.
We'll talk about that, too.
Lucas Kaiser and a bunch of these guys,
they create transformer networks.
That classic paper like, attention is all you need.
And all these things following on from that.
So we're looking at transformer networks.
And these are able to, I mean, this
is what underlies GPT2 and GPT3 and so on,
which are very, very cool and have absolutely
no cognitive understanding of any of the texts we're looking
at, like they're very intelligent idiots, right?
So sorry to take, but I'll bring us back.
But do you think GPT3 understands language?
No, no, no, it understands nothing.
It's a complete idiot.
But it's a brilliant idiot.
You don't think GPT20 will understand language?
No, no, no, no.
So size is not going to buy you understanding.
And any more than a faster car is going to get you to Mars.
It's a completely different kind of thing.
I mean, these networks are very cool.
And as an entrepreneur, I can see many highly valuable uses
for them.
And as an artist, I love them, right?
So I mean, we're using our own neural model, which
is along those lines to control the Philip K. Dick robot now.
And it's amazing to train a neural model on the robot
Philip K. Dick and see it come up with like crazed,
stoned philosopher pronouncements very much
like what Philip K. Dick might have said, right?
These models are super cool.
And I'm working with Hanson Robotics now
on using a similar but more sophisticated one for Sophia,
which we haven't launched yet.
But so I think it's cool.
But no, these are recognizing a large number
of shallow patterns that they're not forming
an abstract representation.
And that's the point I was coming to when
we're looking at grammar induction.
We tried to mine patterns out of the structure,
the transformer network.
And you can, but the patterns aren't what you want.
They're nasty.
So I mean, if you do supervised learning,
if you look at sentences where you know the correct parts
of a sentence, you can learn a matrix that
maps between the internal representation of the transformer
and the parts of the sentence.
And so then you can actually train something
that will output the sentence parts
from the transformer network's internal state.
And we did this, I think, CRISPR manning.
Some others have not done this also.
But I mean, what you get is that the representation is
hardly ugly and is scattered all over the network
and doesn't look like the rules of grammar
that you know are the right rules of grammar, right?
It's kind of ugly.
So what we're actually doing is we're
using a symbolic grammar learning algorithm,
but we're using the transformer neural network
as a sentence probability oracle.
So like, if you have a rule of grammar
and you aren't sure if it's a correct rule of grammar or not,
you can generate a bunch of senses using that rule of grammar
and a bunch of senses violating that rule of grammar.
And you can see the transformer model
doesn't think the senses obeying the rule of grammar
are more probable than the senses
disobeying the rule of grammar.
So in that way, you can use the neural model
as a sense probability oracle to guide a symbolic grammar
learning process.
And that seems to work better than trying
to milk the grammar out of the neural network that
doesn't have an end there.
So I think the thing is these neural nets
are not getting a semantically meaningful representation
internally by and large.
So one line of research is to try to get them to do that.
And Infogam was trying to do that.
So if you look back two years ago,
there was all these papers on Edward,
this probabilistic programming neural net framework
that Google had, which came out of Infogam.
So the idea there was you could train an Infogam neural net
model, which is a generative associative network,
to recognize and generate faces.
And the model would automatically
learn a variable for how long the nose is,
and automatically learn a variable for how wide the eyes are
or how big the lips are or something, right?
So it automatically learned these variables,
which have a semantic meaning.
So that was a rare case where a neural net
trained with a fairly standard GAN method
was able to actually learn a semantic representation.
So for many years, many of us tried
to take that the next step and get
a GAN type neural network that would have not just
a list of semantic latent variables,
but would have, say, a Bayes net of semantic latent variables
with dependencies between them.
The whole programming framework, Edward, was made for that.
I mean, no one got it to work, right?
And it couldn't be.
You think it's possible?
Yeah, do you think so?
I don't know.
It might be that back propagation just won't work for it,
because the gradients are too screwed up.
Maybe you could get to work using CMAES,
or some floating point evolutionary algorithm.
We tried.
We didn't get it to work.
Eventually, we just paused that rather than gave it up.
We paused that and said, well, OK, let's
try more innovative ways to learn what
are the representations implicit in that network
without trying to make it grow inside that network.
And I described how we're doing that in language.
You can do similar things in vision, right?
So what?
Use it as an oracle.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So that's one way, is that you use a structure learning
algorithm, which is symbolic.
And then you use the deep neural net as an oracle
to guide the structure learning algorithm.
The other way to do it is like InfoGam was trying to do
and try to tweak the neural network to have
this symbolic representation inside it.
I tend to think what the brain is doing
is more like using the deep neural net type thing
as an oracle.
I think the visual cortex, or the cerebellum,
are probably learning a non semantically meaningful,
opaque, tangled representation.
And then when they interface with the more cognitive parts
of the cortex, the cortex is sort of using those as an oracle
and learning the abstract representation.
So if you do sports, say, take, for example,
serving in tennis, right?
I mean, my tennis serve is OK, not great,
but I learned it by trial and error, right?
And I mean, I learned music by trial and error, too.
I just sit down and play.
But then if you're an athlete, which I'm not a good athlete,
I mean, then you'll watch videos of yourself serving,
and your coach will help you think about what you're doing,
and you'll then form a declarative representation.
But your cerebellum maybe didn't have a declarative
representation.
Same way with music, like, I will hear something in my head.
I'll sit down and play the thing like I heard it.
And then I will try to study what my fingers did to see,
like, what did you just play?
Like, how did you do that, right?
Because if you're composing, you may
want to see how you did it, and then declaratively morph that
in some way that your fingers wouldn't think of, right?
But the physiological movement may come out
of some opaque, like, cerebellum reinforcement
learned thing, right?
And so that's, I think, trying to milk the structure of a neural
net by treating it as an oracle, maybe more like how
your declarative mind post processes,
what your visual or motor cortex.
I mean, in vision, it's the same way,
like, you can recognize beautiful art much better
than you can say why you think that piece of art is beautiful.
But if you're trained as an art critic,
you do learn to say why.
And some of it's bullshit, but some of it isn't, right?
Some of it is learning to map sensory knowledge
into declarative and linguistic knowledge,
yet without necessarily making the sensory system itself
use a transparent and easily communicable representation.
Yeah, that's fascinating.
To think of neural networks as, like, dumb question
answers that you can just milk to build up a knowledge base.
And then it could be multiple networks, I suppose,
from different.
Yeah, yeah.
So I think if a group like DeepMind or OpenAI were
to build AGI, and I think DeepMind is like 1,000 times
more likely from where I could tell,
because they've hired a lot of people with broad minds
and many different approaches and angles on AGI.
Whereas OpenAI is also awesome, but I
see them as more of like a pure deep reinforcement
learning shock.
Yeah, this time.
I got you.
So far.
Yeah, there's a lot of, you're right.
There's, I mean, there's so much interdisciplinary work
at DeepMind, like Neuroscience.
And you put that together with Google Brain, which,
granted, they're not working that closely together now.
But my oldest son, Zarathustra, is
doing his PhD in machine learning applied
to automated theorem proving in Prague under Joseph Erbon.
So the first paper, DeepMath, which
applied deep neural nets to guide theorem proving
was out of Google Brain.
I mean, by now, the automated theorem proving community
is going way, way, way beyond anything Google was doing.
But still, yeah.
But anyway, if that community was going to make an AGI,
probably one way they would do it was take 25 different neural
modules, architected in different ways,
maybe resembling different parts of the brain,
like a basal ganglia model, cerebellum model,
a thalamus model, a few hippocampus models,
number of different models representing parts of the cortex,
right?
Take all of these and then wire them together to co train
and learn them together like that.
That would be an approach to creating an AGI.
One could implement something like that efficiently
on top of our true AGI, like OpenCog 2.0 system,
once it exists.
Although, obviously, Google has their own highly efficient
implementation architecture.
So I think that's a decent way to build AGI.
I was very interested in that in the mid 90s.
But I mean, the knowledge about how the brain works
sort of pissed me off.
Like, it wasn't there yet.
Like, you know, in the hippocampus,
you have these concept neurons, like the so called
grandmother neuron, which everyone laughed at.
It's actually there.
Like, I have some Lex Friedman neurons
that fire differentially when I see you and not
when I see any other person, right?
Yeah.
So how do these Lex Friedman neurons,
how do they coordinate with the distributed representation
of Lex Friedman I have in my cortex, right?
There's some back and forth in cortex and hippocampus
that lets these discrete symbolic representations
in hippocampus correlate and cooperate
with the distributed representations in cortex.
This probably has to do with how the brain does its version
of abstraction and quantifier logic, right?
Like, you can have a single neuron in the hippocampus
that activates the whole distributed activation pattern
in cortex.
Well, this may be how the brain does,
like, symbolization and abstraction
as in functional programming or something.
But we can't measure it.
Like, we don't have enough electrodes
stuck between the cortex and the hippocampus
in any known experiment to measure it.
So I got frustrated with that direction,
not because it's impossible.
Because we just don't understand enough yet.
Of course, it's a valid research direction.
You can try to understand more and more.
And we are measuring more and more about what
happens in the brain now than ever before.
So it's quite interesting.
On the other hand, I sort of got more of an engineering mindset
about AGI.
I'm like, well, OK, we don't know how the brain works that well.
We don't know how birds fly that well yet either.
We have no idea how a hummingbird flies,
in terms of the aerodynamics of it.
On the other hand, we know basic principles of like flapping
and pushing the air down.
And we know the basic principles of how
the different parts of the brain work.
So let's take those basic principles
and engineer something that embodies those basic principles,
but is well designed for the hardware that we have on hand
right now.
Yes, so do you think we can create AGI before we
understand how the brain works?
I think that's probably what will happen.
And maybe the AGI will help us do better brain imaging that
will then let us build artificial humans, which
is very, very interesting to us, because we are humans, right?
I mean, building artificial humans is super worthwhile.
I just think it's probably not the shortest path to AGI.
So it's a fascinating idea that we would build AGI
to help us understand ourselves.
A lot of people ask me if young people interested
in doing artificial intelligence, they look at sort of doing
graduate level, even undergrads, but graduate level research.
They see what the artificial intelligence community stands
now.
It's not really AGI type research for the most part.
So the natural question they ask is, what advice would you
give?
I mean, maybe I could ask, if people
were interested in working on OpenCog or in some kind of
direct or indirect connection to OpenCog or AGI research,
what would you recommend?
OpenCog, first of all, is open source project.
There's a Google Group discussion list.
There's a GitHub repository.
So if anyone's interested in lending a hand with that aspect
of AGI, introduce yourself on the OpenCog email list.
And there's a Slack as well.
I mean, we're certainly interested to have inputs
into our redesign process for a new version of OpenCog.
But also, we're doing a lot of very interesting research
I mean, we're working on data analysis for COVID clinical
trials.
We're working with Hanson Robotics.
We're doing a lot of cool things with the current version
of OpenCog now.
So there's certainly opportunity to jump into OpenCog
or various other open source AGI oriented projects.
So would you say there's like masters and PhD
thesis in there?
Plenty, yeah, plenty, of course.
I mean, the challenge is to find a supervisor who wants
to foster that sort of research, but it's way easier
than it was when I got my PhD.
So OK, great.
We talked about OpenCog, which is kind of one,
the software framework, but also the actual attempt
to build an AGI system.
And then there is this exciting idea of SingularityNet.
So maybe can you say first, what is SingularityNet?
Sure, sure.
SingularityNet is a platform for realizing
a decentralized network of artificial intelligences.
So Marvin Minsky, the AI pioneer who I knew a little bit,
he had the idea of a society of minds,
like you should achieve an AI not by writing one algorithm
or one program, but you should put a bunch of different AIs
out there, and the different AIs will
interact with each other, each playing their own role.
And then the totality of the society of AIs
would be the thing that displayed the human level
intelligence.
And when he was alive, I had many debates with Marvin
about this idea.
And I think he really thought the mind was more
like a society than I do.
Like, I think you could have a mind that
was as disorganized as a human society,
but I think a human like mind has a bit more
central control than that, actually.
I mean, we have this Thalamus and the Medulla and limbic system.
We have a sort of top down control system
that guides much of what we do, more so than a society does.
So I think he stretched that metaphor a little too far,
but I also think there's something interesting there.
And so in the 90s, when I started my first sort
of nonacademic AI project, WebMind,
which was an AI startup in New York in the Silicon Alley
area in the late 90s, what I was aiming to do there
was make a distributed society of AIs
the different parts of which would live on different computers
all around the world.
And each one would do its own thinking about the data
local to it.
But they would all share information with each other
and outsource work with each other and cooperate.
And the intelligence would be in the whole collective.
And I organized a conference together
with Francis Heiligen at Free University of Brussels
in 2001, which was the Global Brain 0 conference.
And we're planning the next version, the Global Brain 1
conference, at the Free University of Brussels
for next year, 2021, so 20 years after.
And then maybe we can have the next one 10 years after that,
like exponentially faster until the singularity comes, right?
The timing is right, yeah.
Yeah, yeah, exactly.
So the idea with the Global Brain
was maybe the AI won't just be in a program
on one guy's computer, but the AI
will be in the internet as a whole
with the cooperation of different AI modules
living in different places.
So one of the issues you face when
architecting a system like that is how is the whole thing
controlled?
Do you have a centralized control unit
that pulls the puppet strings of all the different modules
there?
Or do you have a fundamentally decentralized network
where the society of AIs is controlled
in some democratic and self organized way,
but all the AIs in that society, right?
And Francis and I had different view of many things,
but we both wanted to make like a global society of AI
of minds with a decentralized organizational mode.
Now, the main difference was he wanted the individual AIs
to be all incredibly simple and all the intelligence
to be on the collective level.
Whereas I thought that was cool, but I
thought a more practical way to do it
might be if some of the agents in the society of minds
were fairly generally intelligent on their own.
So like you could have a bunch of open cogs out there
and a bunch of simpler learning systems,
and then these are all cooperating,
coordinating together, sort of like in the brain.
OK, the brain as a whole is the general intelligence,
but some parts of the cortex, you could say,
have a fair bit of general intelligence on their own.
Whereas, say, parts of the cerebellum or limbic system
have very little general intelligence on their own,
and they're contributing to general intelligence
by way of their connectivity to other modules.
Do you see instantiations of the same kind of maybe
different versions of open cog, but also just
the same version of open cog, and maybe
many instantiations of it as part as being all parts of the brain?
That's what David and Hans and I
want to do with many Sophia and other robots.
Each one has its own individual mind living on a server,
but there's also a collective intelligence infusing them
and a part of the mind living on the edge in each robot.
So the thing is, at that time, as well as web mind being
implemented in Java 1.1 as a massive distributed system,
blockchain wasn't there yet.
So how to have them do this decentralized control?
We sort of knew it.
We knew about distributed systems.
We knew about encryption.
So I mean, we had the key principles
of what underlies blockchain now.
But I mean, we didn't put it together
in the way that's been done now.
So when Vitalik Buterin and colleagues
came out with Ethereum blockchain many, many years
later, like 2013 or something, then I was like,
well, this is interesting.
This is Solidity scripting language.
It's kind of dorky in a way.
And I don't see why you need a turn complete language
for this purpose.
But on the other hand, this is the first time
I could sit down and start to script infrastructure
for decentralized control of the AIs in the society of minds
in a tractable way.
You could hack the Bitcoin code base,
but it's really annoying, whereas Solidity
is Ethereum scripting language.
It is just nicer and easier to use.
I'm very annoyed with it by this point.
But like Java, I mean, these languages
are amazing when they first come out.
So then I came up with the idea that turned
into singularity net.
OK, let's make a decentralized agent system
where a bunch of different AIs wrapped up
in, say, different Docker containers or LXC containers.
Different AIs can each of them have their own identity
on the blockchain.
And the coordination of this community of AIs
has no central controller, no dictator.
And there's no central repository of information.
The coordination of the society of minds
is done entirely by the decentralized network
in a decentralized way by the algorithms.
Because the model of Bitcoin is in math we trust.
And so that's what you need.
You need the society of minds to trust only in math,
not trust only in one centralized server.
So the AI systems themselves are outside of the blockchain,
but then the communication between them.
At the moment, yeah, yeah.
I would have loved to put the AI's operations on chain
in some sense.
But in Ethereum, it's just too slow.
You can't still do it.
Somehow, it's the basic communication
between AI systems that's distributed.
Yeah, yeah.
So basically, an AI is just some software in singularity.
And AI is just some software process living in a container.
And there's a proxy that lives in that container along
with the AI that handles the interaction
with the rest of singularity net.
And then when one AI wants to contribute with another one
in the network, they set up a number of channels.
And the setup of those channels uses the Ethereum blockchain.
But once the channels are set up,
then data flows along those channels
without having to be on the blockchain.
All that goes on the blockchain is the fact
that some data went along that channel.
So you can do.
So there's not a shared knowledge.
Well, the identity of each agent is on the blockchain,
on the Ethereum blockchain.
If one agent rates the reputation of another agent,
that goes on the blockchain.
And agents can publish what APIs they
will fulfill on the blockchain.
But the actual data for AI and the results for AI
is not on the blockchain.
Do you think it could be?
Do you think it should be?
Um, in some cases, it should be.
In some cases, maybe it shouldn't be.
But I mean, I think that.
So I'll give you an example.
Using Ethereum, you can't do it.
Using now, there's more modern and faster
blockchains where you could start to do that in some cases.
Two years ago, that was less so.
It's a very rapidly evolving ecosystem.
So like one example, maybe you can comment on something
I worked a lot on is autonomous vehicles.
You can see each individual vehicle as an AI system.
And you can see vehicles from Tesla, for example,
and then Ford and GM and all these as also like larger.
I mean, they all are running the same kind of system
on each sets of vehicles.
So it's individual AI systems and individual vehicles,
but it's all different.
The satiation is the same AI system within the same company.
So you can envision a situation where all of those AI systems
are put on the singularity net, right?
And how do you see that happening
and what would be the benefit?
And could they share data?
I guess one of the biggest things
is that the power there is in the decentralized control.
But the benefit would have been, is really nice
if they can somehow share the knowledge in an open way
if they choose to.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, those are all quite good points.
So I think the benefit from being on the decentralized network
as we envision it is that we want the AIs and the network
to be outsourcing work to each other
and making API calls to each other frequently.
So the real benefit would be if that AI wanted
to outsource some cognitive processing or data
processing or data preprocessing whatever
to some other AIs in the network, which
specialize in something different.
And this really requires a different way
of thinking about AI software development, right?
So just like object oriented programming
was different than imperative programming.
And now object oriented programmers
all use these frameworks to do things rather than just
libraries even.
Shifting to agent based programming
where AI agent is asking other live real time evolving agents
for feedback in what they're doing,
that's a different way of thinking.
I mean, it's not a new one.
There was loads of papers on agent based programming
in the 80s and onward.
But if you're willing to shift to an agent based model
of development, then you can put less and less in your AI
and rely more and more on interactive calls to other AIs
running in the network.
And of course, that's not fully manifested yet
because although we've rolled out a nice working
version of SingularNet Platform, there's
only 5,200 AIs running in there now.
There's not tens of thousands of AIs.
So we don't have the critical mass
for the whole society of mind to be doing what we want.
Yeah, the magic really happens when
there's just a huge number of agents.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Exactly.
In terms of data, we're partnering closely
with another blockchain project called Ocean Protocol.
An Ocean Protocol, that's the project of Trent McConaughey,
who developed Big Chain DB, which is a blockchain based
database.
So Ocean Protocol is basically blockchain based big data.
It names it making it efficient for different AI
processes or statistical processes
or whatever to share large data sets or one process
can send a clone of itself to work on the other guy's data
set and send results back and so
forth.
So by getting Ocean and you have data lake,
so this is the data ocean, right?
So again, by getting Ocean and SingularNet
to interoperate, we're aiming to take
into account of the big data aspect also.
But it's quite challenging because to build
this whole decentralized blockchain based
infrastructure, your competitors are like Google,
Microsoft, Alibaba, and Amazon, which have so much money
behind their centralized infrastructures,
plus they're solving simpler algorithmic problems
because making it centralized in some ways is easier, right?
So they're very major computer science challenges.
And I think what you saw with the whole ICO boom
in the blockchain and cryptocurrency world
is a lot of young hackers who are hacking Bitcoin or Ethereum,
and they see, well, why don't we make this decentralized
on blockchain, then after they raise some money through an ICO,
they realize how hard it is.
It's like, actually, we're wrestling
with incredibly hard computer science and software
engineering and distributed systems problems which
can be solved, but they're just very difficult to solve.
And in some cases, the individuals
who started those projects were not well equipped
to actually solve the problems that they wanted to do.
So you think, would you say that's the main bottleneck?
If you look at the future of currency, the question is, well,
Currency, the main bottleneck is politics.
It's government, and the bands of armed thugs
that will shoot you if you bypass their currency restriction.
That's right.
So your sense is that versus the technical challenges,
because you just suggested the technical challenges are
quite high as well.
I mean, for making a distributed money,
you could do that on Algorand right now.
I mean, while Ethereum is too slow, there's Algorand,
and there's a few other more modern, more scalable
blockchains that would work fine for a decentralized global
currency.
So I think there were technical bottlenecks
to that two years ago, and maybe Ethereum 2.0
will be as fast as Algorand.
I don't know.
That's not fully written yet, right?
So I think the obstacle to currency being put on the blockchain
is that the currency will be on the blockchain.
It'll just be on the blockchain in a way
that enforces centralized control and government hedge
money rather than otherwise.
ER&P will probably be the first currency on the blockchain.
The Eruble maybe next.
Eruble?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I mean, that's hilarious.
Digital currency makes total sense,
but they would rather do it in the way
that Putin and Xi Jinping have access
to the global keys for everything, right?
So and then the analogy to that in terms of Singularity Net.
I mean, there's echoes.
I think you've mentioned before that Linux gives you hope.
AI is not as heavily regulated as money, right?
Not yet, right?
Not yet.
Oh, that's a lot slipperier than money, too, right?
I mean, money is easier to regulate
because it's kind of easier to define,
whereas AI is it's almost everywhere inside everything.
Where's the boundary between AI and software, right?
I mean, if you're going to regulate AI,
there's no IQ test for every hardware device
that has a learning algorithm.
You're going to be putting like head demonic regulation
on all software.
And I don't rule out that that could happen.
Any adaptive software.
Yeah, but how do you tell if software is adaptive?
Every software is going to be adaptive, I mean.
Well, maybe we're living in the golden age of open source
that will not always be open.
Maybe it'll become centralized control of software
by government.
It is entirely possible.
And part of what I think we're doing with things
like SingularityNet protocol is creating a toolset that
can be used to counteract that sort of thing.
Say a similar thing about mesh networking, right?
Plays a minor role now, the ability
to access internet directly phone to phone.
On the other hand, if your government starts
trying to control your use of the internet,
suddenly having mesh networking there
can be very convenient, right?
And so right now, something like a decentralized blockchain
based AGI framework or narrow AI framework, it's cool.
It's nice to have.
On the other hand, if government
start trying to tamp down on my AI,
interoperating with someone's AI in Russia or somewhere,
then suddenly having a decentralized protocol
that nobody owns or controls becomes an extremely valuable
part of the toolset.
And we've put that out there now.
It's not perfect, but it operates.
And it's pretty blockchain agnostic.
So we're talking to Algorand about making part of SingularityNet
run on Algorand.
My good friend Tufi Saliba has a cool blockchain project
called TOTA, which is a blockchain
without a distributed ledger.
It's like a whole other architecture.
So there's a lot of more advanced things
you can do in the blockchain world.
SingularityNet could be made multi chain,
important to a whole bunch of different blockchains.
And there's a lot of potential and a lot of importance
to putting this kind of toolset out there.
If you compare the OpenCog, what you could see is OpenCog
allows tight integration of a few AI algorithms that
share the same knowledge store in real time, in RAM.
SingularityNet allows loose integration
of multiple different AIs.
They can share knowledge, but they're mostly
not going to be sharing knowledge in RAM on the same machine.
And I think what we're going to have
is a network of networks.
I mean, you have the Knowledge Graph inside the OpenCog system.
And then you have a network of machines inside a distributed
OpenCog mind.
But then that OpenCog will interface with other AIs,
doing deep neural nets or custom biology data analysis
or whatever they're doing in SingularityNet, which
is a looser integration of different AIs, some of which
may be their own networks.
And I think at a very loose analogy,
you could see that in the human body.
The brain has regions like cortex or hippocampus, which
tightly interconnects like conical columns
within the cortex, for example.
Then there's looser connection within the different lobes
of the brain.
And then the brain interconnects with the endocrine system
and different parts of the body even more loosely.
Then your body interacts even more loosely
with the other people that you talk to.
So you often have networks within networks within networks
with progressively looser coupling as you get higher up
in that hierarchy.
I mean, you have that in biology.
You have that in the internet as just networking medium.
And I think that's what we're going
to have in the network of software processes leading to AGI.
That's a beautiful way to see the world.
Again, the same similar question as with OpenCog.
If somebody wanted to build an AI system
and plug into the singularity net,
what would you recommend?
Yeah, so that's much easier.
I mean, OpenCog is still a research system.
So it takes some expertise.
We have tutorials, but it's somewhat cognitively labor
intensive to get up to speed on OpenCog.
And I mean, what's one of the things
we hope to change with the true AGI OpenCog 2.0 version
is just make the learning curve more similar to TensorFlow
or Torch or something.
Because right now, OpenCog is amazingly powerful,
but not simple to do one.
On the other hand, singularity net, as an open platform,
was developed a little more with usability in mind.
Over the blockchain, it's still kind of a pain.
I mean, if you're a command line guy,
there's a command line interface.
It's quite easy to take any AI that has an API
and lives in a Docker container and put it online anywhere.
And then it joins the global singularity net.
And anyone who puts a request for services out
into the singularity net, the peer to peer discovery
mechanism will find your AI.
And if it does what was asked, it
can then start a conversation with your AI
about whether it wants to ask your AI to do something for it,
how much it would cost, and so on.
So that's fairly simple.
If you wrote an AI and want it listed on official singularity
net marketplace, which is on our website,
then we have a publisher portal.
And then there's a KYC process to go through,
because then we have some legal liability for what
goes on that website.
So in a way, that's been an education, too.
There's sort of two layers.
Like there's the open decentralized protocol.
And there's the market.
Yeah, anyone can use the open decentralized protocol.
So say some developers from Iran,
and there's brilliant AI guys in the University of Isfahan
in Tehran, they can put their stuff
on singularity net protocol.
And just like they can put something on the internet,
I don't control it.
But if we're going to list something
on the singularity net marketplace
and put a little picture and a link to it,
then if I put some Iranian AI genius's code on there,
then Donald Trump can send a bunch of jackbooted thugs
to my house to arrest me for doing business with Iran.
So I mean, we already see in some ways
the value of having a decentralized protocol.
Because what I hope is that someone in Iran
will put online an Iranian singularity net marketplace,
right, which you can pay in a cryptographic token, which
is not owned by any country.
And then if you're in Congo or somewhere that
doesn't have any problem with Iran,
you can subcontract AI services that you
find on that marketplace, right, even though US citizens
can't buy US law.
So right now, that's kind of a minor point.
As you alluded, if regulations go in the wrong direction,
it could become more of a major point.
But I think it also is the case that having these workarounds
to regulations in place is a defense mechanism
against those regulations being put into place.
And you can see that in the music industry, right?
I mean, Napster just happened and BitTorrent just happened.
And now most people in my kids generation
they're baffled by the idea of paying for music, right?
My dad pays for music.
But that because these decentralized mechanisms
happened, and then the regulations followed, right?
And the regulations would be very different
if they'd been put into place before there was Napster
and BitTorrent and so forth.
So in the same way, we got to put AI out there
in a decentralized vein and big data out there
in a decentralized vein now so that the most advanced AI
in the world is fundamentally decentralized.
And if that's the case, that's just the reality
the regulators have to deal with.
And then as in the music case, they're
going to come up with regulations
that sort of work with the decentralized reality.
Beautiful.
You were the chief scientist of Hansen Robotics.
You're still involved with Hansen Robotics,
doing a lot of really interesting stuff there.
This is for people who don't know the company that
created Sophia, the robot.
Can you tell me who Sophia is?
I'd rather start by telling you who David Hansen is.
David is the brilliant mind behind the Sophia robot.
And so far, he remains more interesting than his creation,
although she may be improving faster than he is, actually.
I mean, he's a good point.
I met David maybe 2007 or something
at some futurist conference we were both speaking at.
And I could see we had a great deal in common.
I mean, we were both kind of crazy,
but we also we both had a passion for AGI and the singularity.
And we were both huge fans of the work of Philip K. Dick,
the science fiction writer.
And I wanted to create benevolent AGI that would create
massively better life for all humans and all sentient beings,
including animals, plants, and superhuman beings.
And David, he wanted exactly the same thing,
but he had a different idea of how to do it.
He wanted to get computational compassion.
Like he wanted to get machines that would love people
and empathize with people.
And he thought the way to do that was to make a machine that
could look people eye to eye, face to face, look at people,
and make people love the machine.
And the machine loves the people back.
So I thought that was a very different way of looking at it,
because I'm very math oriented.
And I'm just thinking like, what is the abstract cognitive
algorithm that will let the system internalize
the complex patterns of human values, blah, blah, blah,
whereas he's like, look you in the face in the eye
and love you, right?
So we hit it off quite well.
And we talked to each other off and on.
Then I moved to Hong Kong in 2011.
So I've been living all over the place.
I've been in Australia and New Zealand
in my academic career then in Las Vegas for a while.
Was in New York in the late 90s, starting my entrepreneurial career
was in DC for nine years, doing a bunch of US government
consulting stuff.
Then moved to Hong Kong in 2011, mostly
because I met a Chinese girl who I fell in love with.
We got married.
She's actually not from Hong Kong.
She's from mainland China.
But we converged together in Hong Kong,
still married now, have a two year old baby.
So went to Hong Kong to see about a girl, I guess.
Yeah, pretty much, yeah.
And on the other hand, I started doing some cool research
there with Gino Yu at Hong Kong Polytechnic University.
I got involved with a project called
IDEA Using Machine Learning for Stock and Futures
Prediction, which was quite interesting.
And I also got to know something about the consumer electronics
and hardware manufacturer ecosystem in Shenzhen
across the border, which is the only place in the world that
makes sense to make complex consumer electronics at large
scale and low cost.
It's astounding, the hardware ecosystem
that you have in South China.
You ask, people here cannot imagine what it's like.
So David was starting to explore that also.
I invited him to Hong Kong to give a talk at Hong Kong PolyU.
And I introduced him in Hong Kong to some investors
who were interested in his robots.
And he didn't have Sophia then.
He had a robot of Philip K. Dick, our favorite science
fiction writer.
He had a robot Einstein.
He had some little toy robots that looked like his son, Zino.
So through the investors I connected him to,
he managed to get some funding to basically port
Hanson Robotics to Hong Kong.
And when he first moved to Hong Kong,
I was working on AGI research and also on this machine
learning trading project.
So I didn't get that tightly involved with Hanson Robotics.
But as I hung out with David more and more,
as we were both there in the same place,
I started to think about what you
could do to make his robots smarter than they were.
And so we started working together.
And for a few years, I was chief scientist and head
of software at Hanson Robotics.
Then when I got deeply into the blockchain side of things,
I stepped back from that and cofounded Singularity Net.
David Hanson was also one of the cofounders of Singularity
Net.
So part of our goal there had been
to make the blockchain based like cloud mind platform
for Sophia and the other other heads.
Sophia would be just one of the robots in this Singularity Net.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, exactly.
Sophia, many copies of the Sophia Robot
would be among the user interfaces
to the globally distributed Singularity Net cloud mind.
And I mean, David and I talked about that for quite a while
before cofounding Singularity Net.
By the way, in his vision and your vision,
was Sophia tightly coupled to a particular AI system?
Or was the idea that you could just
keep plugging in different AI systems within the head of it?
I think David's view was always that Sophia would
be a platform, much like, say, the Pepper Robot is
a platform from SoftBank.
Should be a platform with a set of nicely designed APIs
that anyone can use to experiment with their different AI
algorithms on that platform.
And Singularity Net, of course, fits right into that, right?
Because Singularity Net, it's an API marketplace.
So anyone can put their AI on there.
OpenCog is a little bit different.
I mean, David likes it, but I'd say it's my thing.
It's not his.
David has a little more passion for biologically based
approaches to AI than I do, which makes sense.
I mean, he's really into human physiology and biology.
He's a character sculptor, right?
So yeah, he's interested in, but he also
worked a lot with rule based and logic based AI systems, too.
So yeah, he's interested in not just Sophia,
but all the Hanson robots as a powerful social and emotional
robotics platform.
And what I saw in Sophia was a way
to get AI algorithms out there in front of a whole lot
of different people in an emotionally compelling way.
And part of my thought was really abstract,
connected to AGI ethics.
And many people are concerned AGI is
going to enslave everybody or turn everybody
into computronium to make extra hard drives
for their cognitive engine or whatever.
And emotionally, I'm not driven to that sort of paranoia.
I'm really just an optimist by nature.
But intellectually, I have to assign a nonzero probability
to those sorts of nasty outcomes.
Because if you're making something 10 times as smart
as you, how can you know what it's going to do?
There's an irreducible uncertainty there,
just as my dog can't predict what I'm going to do tomorrow.
So it seemed to me that based on our current state of knowledge,
the best way to bias the AGI's we create
toward benevolence would be to infuse them with love
and compassion the way that we do our own children.
So you want to interact with AGI's
in the context of doing compassionate, loving,
and beneficial things.
And in that way, as your children
will learn by doing compassionate, beneficial, loving
things alongside you, in that way,
the AI will learn in practice what
it means to be compassionate, beneficial, and loving.
It will get a sort of ingrained, intuitive sense of this,
which it can then abstract in its own way
as it gets more and more intelligent.
Now, David saw this the same way.
That's why he came up with the name
Sophia, which means wisdom.
So it seemed to me making these beautiful, loving robots
to be rolled out for beneficial applications
would be the perfect way to roll out early stage AGI systems
so they can learn from people and not just
learn factual knowledge, but learn human values and ethics
from people while being their home service robots,
their education assistants, their nursing robots.
So that was the grand vision.
Now, if you've ever worked with robots,
the reality is quite different, right?
Like the first principle is the robot is always broken.
I mean, I worked with robots in the 90s a bunch
when you had to solder them together yourself.
And I'd put neural nets during reinforcement learning
on like overturned solid bolt type robots in the 90s
when I was a professor.
Things, of course, advanced a lot, but the principle still
holds.
Yeah, the robot's always broken still holds.
Yeah, so faced with the reality of making Sophia do stuff,
many of my Robo AGI aspirations were temporarily cast aside.
And I mean, there's just a practical problem
of making this robot interact in a meaningful way.
Because you put nice computer vision on there,
but there's always glare.
And then you have a dialogue system.
But at the time I was there, no speech to text algorithm
could deal with Hong Kong, Hong Kong
East People's English accents.
So the speech to text was always bad.
So the robot always sounded stupid
because it wasn't getting the right text, right?
So I started to view that really as what in software
engineering you call a walking skeleton, which
is maybe the wrong metaphor to use for Sophia,
or maybe the right one.
I mean, what a walking skeleton is in software development
is if you're building a complex system, how do you get started?
Well, one way is to first build part one well,
then build part two well, then build part three well, and so on.
Another way is you make like a simple version
of the whole system and put something
in the place of every part the whole system will need
so that you have a whole system that does something.
And then you work on improving each part
in the context of that whole integrated system.
So that's what we did on a software level in Sophia.
We made like a walking skeleton software system where
so there's something that sees, there's something that hears,
there's something that moves, there's
something that remembers, there's something that learns.
You put a simple version of each thing in there
and you connect them all together
so that the system will do its thing.
So there's a lot of AI in there.
There's not any AGI in there.
I mean, there's computer vision to recognize people's faces,
recognize when someone comes in the room and leaves,
try to recognize whether two people are together or not.
The dialogue system, it's a mix of like hand coded rules
with deep neural nets that come up with their own responses.
And there's some attempt to have a narrative structure
and sort of try to pull the conversation into something
with the beginning, middle, and end
and the sort of story arc.
So it's, I mean, like if you look at the Lobner Prize
and the systems that beat the Turing test currently,
they're heavily rule based because like you had said,
narrative structure to create compelling conversations,
you currently, neural networks cannot do that well,
even with Google Mina.
When you actually look at full scale conversations,
it's just not.
Yeah, this is the thing.
So we've been, I've actually been running an experiment
the last couple of weeks taking Sophia's chatbot
and then Facebook's transformer chatbot,
which they opened the model.
We've had them chatting to each other for a number of weeks
on the server just.
That's funny.
We're generating training data of what Sophia says
and a wide variety of conversations.
But we can see, compared to Sophia's current chatbot,
the Facebook deep neural chatbot comes up
with a wider variety of fluent sounding sentences.
On the other hand, it rambles like mad.
The Sophia chatbot, it's a little more repetitive
in the sentence structures it uses.
On the other hand, it's able to keep like a conversation arc
over a much longer, longer period, right?
So there, now you can probably surmount that using Reformer
and like using various other deep neural architectures
to improve the way these transformer models are trained.
But in the end, neither one of them really understands
what's going on.
And I mean, that's the challenge I had with Sophia
is if I were doing a robotics project aimed at AGI,
I would want to make like a robot toddler that was just
learning about what it was seeing.
Because then the language is grounded
in the experience of the robot.
But what Sophia needs to do to be Sophia
is talk about sports or the weather or robotics
or the conference she's talking at.
She needs to be fluent talking about any damn thing
in the world.
And she doesn't have grounding for all those things.
So there's this just like, I mean,
Google Mina and Facebook's chatbot
don't have grounding for what they're talking about either.
So in a way, the need to speak fluently about things
where there's no non linguistic grounding
pushes what you can do for Sophia in the short term
a bit away from AGI.
Permission.
I mean, if it pushes you towards IBM Watson situation
where you basically have to heuristic and hardcore stuff
and rule based stuff, I have to ask you about this.
OK, so because in part Sophia is an art creation
because it's beautiful.
She's beautiful because she inspires
through our human nature of anthropomorphized things.
We immediately see an intelligent being there.
Because David is a great sculptor.
He is a great sculptor, that's right.
So in fact, if Sophia just had nothing inside her head,
said nothing, if she just sat there,
we already prescribed some intelligence to her.
There's a long selfie line in front of her after every talk.
That's right.
So it captivated the imagination of many people.
I was going to say the world, but yeah, I mean a lot of people.
And billions of people, which is amazing.
It's amazing, right?
Now, of course, many people have prescribed essentially
AGI type of capabilities to Sophia when they see her.
And of course, friendly French folk like Jan Lacune
immediately see that of the people from the AI community
and get really frustrated.
Because it's understandable.
So what, and then they criticize people like you who sit back
and don't say anything about, like basically allow
the imagination of the world, allow the world
to continue being captivated.
So what's your sense of that kind of annoyance
that the AI community has?
I think there's several parts to my reaction there.
First of all, if I weren't involved with Hanson Rebox
and didn't know David Hanson personally,
I probably would have been very annoyed initially
at Sophia as well.
I mean, I can understand the reaction.
I would have been like, wait, all these stupid people out
there think this is an AGI.
But it's not an AGI.
But they're tricking people that this very cool robot is an AGI.
And now those of us trying to raise funding to build AGI,
people will think it's already there and already works.
So on the other hand, I think even
if I weren't directly involved with it,
once I dug a little deeper into David and the robot
and the intentions behind it, I think
I would have stopped being pissed off.
Whereas folks like Jan Lacune have remained pissed off
after their initial reaction.
That's his thing.
I think that in particular struck me as somewhat ironic
because Jan Lacune is working for Facebook, which
is using machine learning to program
the brains of the people in the world
toward vapid consumerism and political extremism.
So if your ethics allows you to use machine learning in such
a blatantly destructive way, why would your ethics not
allow you to use machine learning to make
a lovable theatrical robot that draws some foolish people
into its theatrical illusion?
Like if the pushback had come from Yoshua Benjiro,
I would have felt much more humbled by it.
Because he's not using AI for blatant evil, right?
On the other hand, he also is a super nice guy
and doesn't bother to go out there
trashing other people's work for no good reason, right?
Shots fired.
But I get you.
I mean, that's.
I mean, if you're going to ask, I'm going to answer.
No, for sure.
I think we'll go back and forth.
I'll talk to Jan again.
I would add on this, though.
I mean, David Hansen is an artist,
and he often speaks off the cuff.
And I have not agreed with everything
that David has said or done regarding Sophia.
And David also was not agreed with everything
David has said or done about Sophia.
That's an important point.
I mean, David is an artistic wild man,
and that's part of his charm.
That's part of his genius.
So certainly, there have been conversations
within Hansen Robotics in between me and David,
where I was like, let's be more open about how this thing is
working.
And I did have some influence in nudging Hansen Robotics
to be more open about how Sophia was working.
And David wasn't especially opposed to this.
And he was actually quite right about it.
What he said was, you can tell people
exactly how it's working, and they won't care.
They want to be drawn into the illusion.
And he was 100% correct.
I'll tell you what, this wasn't Sophia.
This was Philip K. Dick.
But we did some interactions between humans and Philip
K. Dick robot in Austin, Texas, a few years back.
And in this case, the Philip K. Dick
was just teleoperated by another human in the other room.
So during the conversations, we didn't tell people
the robot was teleoperated.
We just said, here, have a conversation with Phil Dick.
We're going to film you, right?
And they had a great conversation with Philip K. Dick,
teleoperated by my friend, Stefan Bugai.
After the conversation, we brought the people
in the back room to see Stefan, who
was controlling the Philip K. Dick robot.
But they didn't believe it.
These people were like, well, yeah,
but I know I was talking to Phil.
Maybe Stefan was typing, but the spirit of Phil
was animating his mind while he was typing.
So even though they knew it was a human in the loop,
even seeing the guy there, they still
believe that was Phil they were talking to.
A small part of me believes that they were right, actually.
Because our understanding.
Well, we don't understand the universe.
That's the thing.
There is a cosmic mind field that we're all embedded in
that yields many strange synchronicities in the world,
which is a topic we don't have time to go into too much here.
I mean, there's something to this where
our imagination about Sophia and people
like Jan Likun being frustrated about it
is all part of this beautiful dance
of creating artificial intelligence that's almost essential.
You see with Boston Dynamics, whom I'm a huge fan of as well,
the kind of, I mean, these robots are very
far from intelligent.
I played with their last one, actually.
With the spot menu.
Yeah, very cool.
I mean, it reacts quite in a fluid and flexible way.
But we immediately ascribe the kind of intelligence.
We immediately ascribe AGI to them.
Yeah, yeah.
If you kick it and it falls down and goes out,
you feel bad, right?
You can't help it.
And I mean, that's part of, that's
going to be part of our journey in creating
intelligent systems more and more and more and more.
Like, as Sophia starts out with a walking skeleton,
as you add more and more intelligence,
I mean, we're going to have to deal with this kind of idea.
Absolutely.
And about Sophia, I would say, I mean, first of all,
I have nothing against Jan Likun.
No, no, this is fine.
This is all for fun.
He's a nice guy.
If he wants to play the media banter game, I'm happy to play.
He's a good researcher and a good human being.
I'd happily work with the guy.
The other thing I was going to say
is I have been explicit about how Sophia works.
And I've posted online, and what, H Plus Magazine,
an online web scene.
I mean, I've posted a moderately detailed article
explaining, like, there are three software systems
we've used inside Sophia.
There's a timeline editor, which is like a rule based
authoring system, where she's really just
being an outlet for what a human scripted.
There's a chat bot, which has some rule based
on some neural aspects.
And then sometimes we've used OpenCog behind Sophia,
where there's more learning and reasoning.
And the funny thing is, I can't always tell which system
is operating here, right?
I mean, whether she's really learning or thinking
or just appears to be, over half hour, I could tell.
But over three or four minutes of interaction, I could tell.
Even having three systems that's already
sufficiently complex where you can't really tell right away.
Yeah, the thing is, even if you get up on stage
and tell people how Sophia is working,
and then they talk to her, they still attribute
more agency and consciousness to her than is really there.
So I think there's a couple levels of ethical issue there.
One issue is, should you be transparent about how
Sophia is working?
And I think you should.
And I think we have been.
I mean, there's articles online that there's
some TV special that goes through me explaining
the three subsystems behind Sophia.
So the way Sophia works is out there much more clearly
than how Facebook say I works or something, right?
I mean, we've been fairly explicit about it.
The other is, given that telling people
how it works doesn't cause them to not attribute
too much intelligence agency to it anyway,
then should you keep fooling them when they want to be fooled?
And I mean, the whole media industry
is based on fooling people the way they want to be fooled.
And we are fooling people 100% toward a good end.
I mean, we are playing on people's sense of empathy
and compassion so that we can give them
a good user experience with helpful robots
and so that we can fill the AI's mind with love and compassion.
So I've been talking a lot with Hansen Robotics lately
about collaborations in the area of medical robotics.
And we haven't quite pulled the trigger on a project
in that domain yet, but we may well do so quite soon.
So we've been talking a lot about robots can help with elder
care, robots can help with kids, David's and a lot of things
with autism therapy and robots before.
In the COVID era, having a robot that
can be a nursing assistant in various senses
can be quite valuable.
The robots don't spread infection,
and they can also deliver more attention
than human nurses can give, right?
So if you have a robot that's helping a patient with COVID,
if that patient attributes more understanding and compassion
and agency to that robot, then it really
has, because it looks like a human.
I mean, is that really bad?
I mean, we can tell them it doesn't fully understand you,
and they don't care, because they're
lying there with a fever and they're sick.
But they don't react better to that robot
with its loving, warm facial expression
than they would to a pepper robot or a metallic looking robot.
So it's really about how you use it, right?
If you made a human looking like door to door sales robot that
used its human looking appearance to scan people out
of their money, then you're using that connection
in a bad way, but you could also use it in a good way.
But then that's the same problem with every technology, right?
Beautifully put.
So like you said, we're living in the era of the COVID.
This is 2020, one of the craziest years in recent history.
So if we zoom out and look at this pandemic,
the coronavirus pandemic, maybe let
me ask you this kind of thing in viruses in general.
When you look at viruses, do you see them
as a kind of intelligence system?
I think the concept of intelligence
is not that natural of a concept in the end.
I think human minds and bodies are
a kind of complex, self organizing adaptive system.
And viruses certainly are that, right?
They're a very complex, self organizing adaptive system.
If you want to look at intelligence as Marcus Hoeter
defines it as sort of optimizing computable reward
functions over computable environments,
for sure viruses are doing that, right?
And I mean, in doing so, they're causing some harm to us.
So the human immune system is a very complex,
self organizing adaptive system, which
has a lot of intelligence to it.
And viruses are also adapting and dividing
into new mutant strains and so forth.
And ultimately, the solution is going
to be nanotechnology, right?
I mean, the solution is going to be making little nanobots that
fight the viruses, or?
Well, people will use them to make nastier viruses,
but hopefully we can also use them to just detect combat
and kill the viruses.
But I think now we're stuck with the biological mechanisms
to combat these viruses.
And yeah, we've been, AGI is not yet mature enough
to use against COVID, but we've been using machine learning
and also some machine reasoning in OPENCOG
to help some doctors to do personalized medicine
against COVID.
So the problem there is, given the person's genomics
and given their clinical medical indicators,
how do you figure out which combination of antivirals
is going to be most effective against COVID for that person?
And so that's something where machine learning is interesting,
but also we're finding the abstraction
we get in OPENCOG with machine reasoning is interesting,
because it can help with transfer learning
when you have not that many different cases to study
and qualitative differences between different strains
of a virus or people of different ages who may have COVID.
So there's a lot of different disparate data to work with
and small data sets and somehow integrating them.
This is one of the shameful things
that's very hard to get that data.
So I mean, we're working with a couple groups
doing clinical trials.
And they're sharing data with us under nondisclosure.
But what should be the case is every COVID clinical trial
should be putting data online somewhere,
like suitably encrypted to protect patient privacy,
so that anyone with the AI algorithms
should be able to help analyze it.
And any biologist should be able to analyze it by hand
to understand what they can.
Instead, that data is siloed inside whatever
hospital is running the clinical trial, which is completely
asinine and ridiculous.
Why the world works that way?
I mean, we could all analyze why,
but it's insane that it does.
You look at this hydrochloroquine, right?
All these clinical trials were done
were reported by Surgisphere, some little company
no one ever heard of.
And everyone paid attention to this.
So they were doing more clinical trials based on that.
Then they stopped doing clinical trials based on that.
Then they started again, and why isn't that data just
out there so everyone can analyze it
and see what's going on, right?
Do you have hope that data will be out there eventually
for future pandemics?
I mean, do you have hope that our society will move
in the direction of such?
Not in the immediate future, because the US and China
frictions are getting very high.
So it's hard to see US and China as moving in the direction
of openly sharing data with each other, right?
It's not.
There's some sharing of data, but different groups
are keeping their data private till they've
milked the best results from it, and then they share it, right?
So yeah, we're working with some data
that we've managed to get our hands on, something we're
doing to do good for the world.
And it's a very cool playground for putting deep neural nets
and open cog together.
So we have a bioadm space full of all sorts of knowledge
from many different biology experiments
about human longevity and from biology knowledge bases online.
And we can do graph to vector type embeddings,
where we take nodes from the hypergraph,
embed them into vectors, which can then
feed into neural nets for different types of analysis.
And we were doing this in the context of a project called
Rejuve that we spun off from SingularityNet
to do longevity analytics.
I can understand why people live to 105 years
over, and other people don't.
And then we had to spin off Singularity Studio,
where we're working with some health care companies
on data analytics.
So this bioadm space, we built for these more commercial
and longevity data analysis purposes.
We're repurposing and feeding COVID data
into the same bioadm space and playing around
with graph embeddings from that graph into neural nets
for bioinformatics.
So it's both being a cool testing ground for some
of our bio AI learning and reasoning.
And it seems we're able to discover things
that people weren't seeing otherwise.
Because the thing in this case is for each combination
of antivirals, you may have only a few patients who've
tried that combination.
And those few patients may have their particular characteristics,
like this combination of three was tried only
on people age 80 or over.
This other combination of three, which
has an overlap with the first combination,
was tried more on young people.
So how do you combine those different pieces of data?
It's a very dodgy transfer learning problem,
which is the kind of thing that the probabilistic reasoning
algorithms we have inside OpenCog are better at than deep neural
networks.
On the other hand, you have gene expression data,
where you have 25,000 genes and the expression level
of each gene in the peripheral blood of each person.
So that sort of data, either deep neural nets or tools
like XGBoost or CatBoost, these decision forest trees,
are better at dealing with it than OpenCog,
because it's just these huge, messy floating point
vectors that are annoying for a logic engine to deal with,
but are perfect for a decision forest or a neural net.
So it's a great playground for hybrid AI methodology,
and we can have a singularity net,
have OpenCog in one agent, and XGBoost in a different agent,
and they talk to each other.
But at the same time, it's highly practical,
because we're working with, for example, some physicians
on this project, and the group, physicians in the group
called Anthropinion, based out of Vancouver and Seattle,
who are, these guys are working every day in the hospital
with patients dying of COVID.
So it's quite cool to see neural symbolic AI where
the rubber hits the road, trying to save people's lives.
I've been doing bio AI since 2001,
but mostly human longevity research,
and fly longevity research, try to understand
why some organisms really live a long time.
This is the first time, like, race against the clock,
and try to use the AI to figure out stuff that,
like, if we take two months longer to solve the AI problem,
some more people will die, because we
don't know what combination of antivirals to give them.
Yeah. At the societal level, at the biological level,
at any level, are you hopeful about us
as a human species getting out of this pandemic?
What are your thoughts on it in general?
The pandemic will be gone in a year or two
once there's a vaccine for it.
So, I mean, that's.
A lot of pain and suffering can happen in that time.
So that could be reversible on me.
I think if you spend much time in sub Saharan Africa,
you can see there's a lot of pain and suffering happening
all the time, like, you walk through the streets
of any large city in sub Saharan Africa,
and there are loads, I mean, tens of thousands,
probably hundreds of thousands of people,
lying by the side of the road,
dying mainly of curable diseases without food or water,
and either ostracized by their families or they left
their family house because they didn't want
to infect their family, right?
I mean, there's tremendous human suffering
on the planet all the time,
which most folks in the developed world
pay no attention to, and COVID is not remotely the worst.
How many people are dying of malaria all the time?
I mean, so COVID is bad.
It is by no mean the worst thing happening.
And setting aside diseases, I mean,
there are many places in the world where you're at risk
of having like your teenage son kidnapped by armed militias
and forced to get killed in someone else's war,
fighting tribe against tribe, I mean, so.
Humanity has a lot of problems,
which we don't need to have,
given the state of advancement of our technology right now.
And I think COVID is one of the easier problems to solve
in the sense that there are many brilliant people
working on vaccines.
We have the technology to create vaccines,
and we're gonna create new vaccines.
We should be more worried that we haven't managed
to defeat malaria after so long
and after the Gates Foundation and others
putting so much money into it.
I mean, I think clearly the whole global medical system,
the global health system,
and the global political and socioeconomic system
are incredibly unethical and unequal and badly designed.
And I mean, I don't know how to solve that directly.
I think what we can do indirectly to solve it
is to make systems that operate in parallel
and off to the side of the governments
that are nominally controlling the world
with their armies and militias.
And to the extent that you can make compassionate,
peer to peer, decentralized,
decentralized frameworks for doing things,
these are things that can start out unregulated,
and then if they get traction
before the regulators come in,
then they've influenced the way the world works, right?
SingularityNet aims to do this with AI,
Rejuve, which is a spinoff from SingularityNet.
You can see it, Rejuve.io.
How do you spell that?
R E J U V E, Rejuve.io.
That aims to do the same thing for medicine.
So it's like peer to peer sharing of medical data.
So you can share medical data
into a secure data wallet.
You can get advice about your health and longevity
through apps that Rejuve will launch
within the next couple of months.
And then SingularityNet AI can analyze all this data,
but then the benefits from that analysis
are spread among all the members of the network.
But I mean, of course,
I'm gonna hawk my particular projects,
but I mean, whether or not SingularityNet
and Rejuve are the answer,
I think it's key to create decentralized mechanisms
for everything.
I mean, for AI, for human health, for politics,
for jobs and employment, for sharing social information,
and to the extent decentralized peer to peer methods
designed with universal compassion at the core
can gain traction,
then these will just decrease the role that government has.
And I think that's much more likely to do good
than trying to explicitly reform the global government system.
I mean, I'm happy other people
are trying to explicitly reform
the global government system.
On the other hand, you look at how much good the internet
or Google did or mobile phones did.
Even you're making something that's decentralized
and throwing it out everywhere,
and it takes hold, then government has to adapt.
And I mean, that's what we need to do with AI and with health.
And in that light, I mean,
the centralization of healthcare and of AI
is certainly not ideal, right?
Like most AI PhDs are being sucked in
by half dozen to a dozen big companies.
Most AI processing power is being bought
by a few big companies for their own proprietary good.
And most medical research is within a few pharmaceutical companies.
And clinical trials run by pharmaceutical companies
will stay solid within those pharmaceutical companies.
You know, these large centralized entities,
which are intelligences in themselves, these corporations,
but they're mostly malevolent,
psychopathic and sociopathic intelligences.
Not saying the people involved are out,
but the corporations as self organizing entities on their own,
which are concerned with maximizing shareholder value
as a sole objective function.
I mean, AI and medicine are being sucked
into these pathological corporate organizations
with government cooperation.
And Google cooperating with British and US government
on this as one among many, many different examples.
23andMe providing you the nice service of sequencing your genome
and then licensing the genome to GlaxoSmithKlyna
on an exclusive basis, right?
Now, you can take your own DNA and do whatever you want with it.
But the pooled collection of 23andMe sequence DNA
is just to GlaxoSmithKlyna.
Someone else could reach out to everyone who had worked
with 23andMe to sequence their DNA and say,
give us your DNA for our open and decentralized repository
that will make available to everyone.
But nobody's doing that because it's a pain to get organized.
And the customer list is proprietary to 23andMe, right?
So, yeah, I mean, this, I think, is a greater risk to humanity
from AI than rogue AGIs turning the universe
into paperclips or a computronium.
Because what you have here is mostly goodhearted and nice
people who are sucked into a mode of organization
of large corporations, which has evolved just
for no individual's fault, just because that's
the way society has evolved.
It's not altruistic as self interested
and become psychopathic, like you said.
The corporation is psychopathic, even if the people are not.
And that's really the disturbing thing about it,
because the corporations can do things
that are quite bad for society, even if nobody has,
nobody has a bad intention.
And then no individual member of that corporation
has a bad intention.
No, some probably do, but it's not
necessary that they do for the corporation.
Like, I mean, Google, I know a lot of people on Google,
and there are, with very few exceptions,
they're all very nice people who genuinely
want what's good for the world.
And Facebook, I know fewer people,
but it's probably mostly true.
It's probably like fine young geeks who want to build
cool technology.
I actually tend to believe that even the leaders, even Mark
Zuckerberg, one of the most disliked people in tech,
is also wants to do good for the world.
What do you think about Jamie Dimon?
Who's Jamie Dimon?
The heads of the great banks may have
a different psychology.
Oh, boy.
Yeah.
Well, I tend to be naive about these things
and see the best.
I tend to agree with you that I think
the individuals want to do good by the world.
But the mechanism of the company can sometimes
be its own intelligence system.
I mean, there's a, I, and one of my cousin, Mario Gertzels,
worked for Microsoft since 1985 or something.
And I can see for him, I mean, as well as just working
on cool projects, your coding stuff
that gets used by billions and billions of people.
And do you think if I improve this feature,
that's making billions of people's lives easier, right?
So of course, that's cool.
And the engineers are not in charge of running the company
anyway.
And of course, even if you're Mark Zuckerberg or Larry Page,
I mean, you still have a fiduciary responsibility.
And I mean, you're responsible to the shareholders,
your employees, who you want to keep paying them and so forth.
So yeah, you're invested in this system.
And when I worked in DC, I worked
a bunch with INSCOM, US Army Intelligence.
And I was heavily politically opposed
to what the US Army was doing in Iraq at that time,
like torturing people in Abu Ghraib.
But everyone I knew in US Army and INSCOM,
when I hung out with them, was a very nice person.
They were friendly to me.
They were nice to my kids and my dogs, right?
And they really believed that the US was
fighting the forces of evil.
And if you ask me about Abu Ghraib, they're like, well,
but these Arabs will chop us into pieces.
So how can you say we're wrong to waterboard them a bit, right?
Like that's much less than what they would do to us.
It's just in their worldview, what they were doing
was really genuinely for the good of humanity.
None of them woke up in the morning
and said like, I want to do harm to good people
because I'm just a nasty guy, right?
So, yeah, most people on the planet
setting aside a few genuine psychopaths and sociopaths,
I mean, most people on the planet
have a heavy dose of benevolence and wanting to do good.
And also a heavy capability to convince themselves,
whatever they feel like doing or whatever is best for them
is for the good of humankind, right?
So the more we can decentralize control of...
Decentralization, you know, the democracy is horrible,
but this is like Winston Churchill said,
you know, it's the worst possible system of government
except for all the others, right?
I mean, I think the whole mess of humanity
has many, many very bad aspects to it,
but so far the track record of elite groups
who know what's better for all of humanity
is much worse than the track record
of the whole teaming democratic participatory mess
of humanity, right?
I mean, none of them is perfect by any means.
The issue with a small elite group
that knows what's best is even if it starts out
as truly benevolent and doing good things
in accordance with its initial good intentions,
you find out you need more resources,
you need a bigger organization,
you pull in more people, internal politics arises,
the difference of opinions arise and bribery happens.
Like some opponent organization takes a second in command now
to make some, the first in command
of some other organization.
And I mean, that's, there's a lot of history
of what happens with elite groups
thinking they know what's best for the human race.
So yeah, if I have to choose,
I'm gonna reluctantly put my faith
in the vast democratic decentralized mass.
And I think corporations have a track record
of being ethically worse
than their constituent human parts.
And, you know, democratic governments
have a more mixed track record, but there are at least...
That's the best we got.
Yeah, I mean, you can, there's Iceland,
very nice country, right?
I mean, very democratic for 800 plus years,
very, very benevolent, beneficial government.
And I think, yeah, there are track records
of democratic modes of organization, Linux, for example.
Some of the people in charge of Linux
are overtly complete assholes, right?
And trying to reform themselves in many cases,
in other cases not, but the organization as a whole,
I think it's done a good job overall.
It's been very welcoming in the third world, for example.
And it's allowed advanced technology
to roll out on all sorts of different embedded devices
and platforms in places where people couldn't afford
to pay for proprietary software.
So I'd say the internet, Linux, and many democratic nations
are examples of how sort of an open,
decentralized democratic methodology
can be ethically better than the sum of the parts
rather than worse.
And corporations, that has happened only for a brief period
and then it goes sour, right?
I mean, I'd say a similar thing about universities.
Like university is a horrible way to organize research
and get things done, yet it's better than anything else
we've come up with, right?
Company can be much better, but for a brief period of time
and then it stops being so good, right?
So then I think if you believe that AGI
is gonna emerge sort of incrementally
out of AIs doing practical stuff in the world,
like controlling humanoid robots or driving cars
or diagnosing diseases or operating killer drones
or spying on people and reporting on to the government,
then what kind of organization creates more and more
advanced narrow AI verging toward AGI
may be quite important because it will guide like
what's in the mind of the early stage AGI
as it first gains the ability to rewrite its own code base
and project itself toward super intelligence.
And if you believe that AI may move toward AGI
out of this sort of synergetic activity
of many agents cooperating together,
rather than just to have one person's project,
then who owns and controls that platform
for AI cooperation becomes also very, very important, right?
And is that platform AWS, is it Google Cloud?
Is it Alibaba?
Or is it something more like the internet
or SingularityNet, which is open and decentralized?
So if all of my weird machinations come to pass, right?
I mean, we have the Hanson robots
being a beautiful user interface,
gathering information on human values
and being loving and compassionate to people
in medical home service, robot office applications.
You have SingularityNet in the backend
networking together many different AIs
toward cooperative intelligence,
fueling the robots among many other things.
You have OpenCog 2.0 and TrueAGI
as one of the sources of AI
inside this decentralized network,
powering the robot and medical AIs
helping us live a long time
and cure diseases among other things.
And this whole thing is operating in a democratic
and decentralized way, right?
I think if anyone can pull something like this off,
whether using the specific technologies
I've mentioned or something else,
I mean, then I think we have a higher odds
of moving toward a beneficial technological Singularity
rather than one in which the first super AGI
is indifferent to humans and just considers us
an inefficient use of molecules.
That was a beautifully articulated vision for the world.
So thank you for that.
Well, let's talk a little bit about life and death.
I'm pro life and anti death.
For most people, there's few exceptions
that I won't mention here.
I'm glad just like your dad,
you're taking a stand against death.
You have, by the way, you have a bunch of awesome music
where you play piano online.
One of the songs that I believe you've written,
the lyrics go, by the way, I like the way it sounds.
People should listen to it, it's awesome.
I considered, I probably will cover it, it's a good song.
Tell me why do you think it is a good thing
that we all get old and die?
One of the songs, I love the way it sounds.
But let me ask you about death first.
Do you think there's an element to death
that's essential to give our life meaning?
Like the fact that this thing ends?
Well, let me say, I'm pleased and a little embarrassed.
You've been listening to that music I put online.
That's awesome.
One of my regrets in life recently is
I would love to get time to really produce music well.
Like I haven't touched my sequencer software in like five years.
Like I would love to like rehearse and produce and edit
but with a two year old baby
and trying to create the singularity, there's no time.
So I just made the decision to,
when I'm playing random shit in an off moment.
Just record it.
Oh, you just put it out there like whatever.
Maybe if I'm unfortunate enough to die,
maybe that can be input to the AGI
when it tries to make an accurate mind upload of me, right?
Death is bad.
I mean, that's very simple.
It's battling, we should have to say that.
I mean, of course, people can make meaning out of death.
And if someone is tortured,
maybe they can make beautiful meaning out of that torture
and write a beautiful poem
about what it was like to be tortured, right?
I mean, we're very creative.
We can melt beauty and positivity
out of even the most horrible and shitty things.
But just because if I was tortured,
I could write a good song about what it was like
to be tortured doesn't make torture good.
And just because people are able to derive meaning
and value from death,
doesn't mean they wouldn't derive even better meaning
and value from ongoing life without death.
Which I very...
You're definite.
Yeah, yeah.
So if you could live forever, would you live forever?
Forever.
My goal with longevity research
is to abolish the plague of involuntary death.
I don't think people should die unless they choose to die.
If I had to choose forced immortality
versus dying, I would choose forced immortality.
On the other hand,
if I had the choice of immortality
with the choice of suicide whenever I felt like it,
of course I would take that instead.
And that's the more realistic choice.
I mean, there's no reason you should have forced immortality.
You should be able to live
until you get sick of living, right?
I mean, that will seem insanely obvious
to everyone 50 years from now.
And they will be so...
I mean, people who thought death gives meaning to life
so we should all die,
they will look at that 50 years from now.
The way we now look at the Anabaptists in the year 1000
who gave away all their positions,
went on top of the mountain for Jesus,
for Jesus to come and bring them to the ascension.
I mean, it's ridiculous that people think death is good
because you gain more wisdom
as you approach dying.
I mean, of course it's true.
I mean, I'm 53.
And the fact that I might have only a few more decades left,
it does make me reflect on things differently.
It does give me a deeper understanding of many things.
But I mean, so what?
You could get a deep understanding
in a lot of different ways.
Pain is the same way.
Like we're gonna abolish pain.
And that's even more amazing than abolishing death, right?
I mean, once we get a little better at neuroscience,
we'll be able to go in and adjust the brain
so that pain doesn't hurt anymore, right?
And that, you know, people will say that's bad
because there's so much beauty
and overcoming pain and suffering.
Oh, sure.
And there's beauty and overcoming torture too,
but, and some people like to cut themselves,
but not many, right?
I mean.
That's an interesting, so, but to push,
I mean, to push back again,
this is the Russian side of me,
I do romanticize suffering.
It's not obvious.
I mean, the way you put it, it seems very logical.
It's almost absurd to romanticize suffering or pain or death.
But to me, a world without suffering,
without pain, without death,
it's not obvious what that world looks like.
Well, then you can stay in the people's zoo
with the people torturing each other, right?
No, but what I'm saying is, I don't,
well, that's, I guess what I'm trying to say,
I don't know if I was presented with that choice,
what I would choose because it, to me.
This is a subtler, it's a subtler matter.
And I've posed it in this conversation
in an unnecessarily extreme way.
So I think, I think the way you should think about it
is what if there's a little dial on the side of your head
and you could turn to how much pain hurt,
turn it down to zero, turn up to 11,
like in spinal tap if it wants,
maybe through an actual spinal tap, right?
So I mean, would you opt to have that dial there or not?
That's the question.
The question isn't whether you would turn the pain down
to zero all the time.
Would you opt to have the dial or not?
My guess is that in some dark moment of your life,
you would choose to have the dial implanted
and then it would be there.
Just to confess a small thing, don't ask me why,
but I'm doing this physical challenge currently
where I'm doing 680 pushups and pullups a day.
And my shoulder is currently as we sit here
in a lot of pain.
And I don't know.
I would certainly right now, if you gave me a dial,
I would turn that sucker to zero as quickly as possible.
But I think the whole point of this journey is,
I don't know.
Well, because you're a twisted human being.
I'm a twisted.
So the question is, am I somehow twisted
because I created some kind of narrative for myself
so that I can deal with the injustice
and the suffering in the world?
Or is this actually going to be a source of happiness
from humans?
Well, to an extent is a research question
that humanity will undertake, right?
So I mean, human beings do have a particular biological makeup,
which sort of implies a certain probability distribution
over motivational systems, right?
So I mean, we, and that is there.
Well put.
That is there.
Now, the question is, how flexibly can that morph
as society and technology change, right?
So if we're given that dial and we're given a society
in which say we don't have to work for a living
and in which there's an ambient decentralized
benevolent AI network that will warn us
when we're about to hurt ourselves.
If we're in a different context,
can we consistently with being genuinely and fully human,
can we consistently get into a state of consciousness
where we just want to keep the pain dial turned
all the way down and yet we're leading very rewarding
and fulfilling lives, right?
Now, I suspect the answer is yes, we can do that,
but I don't know that for certain.
Yeah, now I'm more confident that we could create
a nonhuman AGI system which just didn't need
an analog of feeling pain.
And I think that AGI system will be fundamentally healthier
and more benevolent than human beings.
So I think it might or might not be true
that humans need a certain element of suffering
to be satisfied humans,
consistent with the human physiology.
If it is true, that's one of the things
that makes us fucked and disqualified
to be the super AGI, right?
I mean, the nature of the human motivational system
is that we seem to gravitate towards situations
where the best thing in the large scale
is not the best thing in the small scale,
according to our subjective value system.
So we gravitate towards subjective value judgments
where to gratify ourselves in the large,
we have to ungratify ourselves in the small.
And we do that in, you see that in music,
there's a theory of music which says
the key to musical aesthetics
is the surprising fulfillment of expectations.
Like you want something that will fulfill
the expectations elicited in the prior part of the music,
but in a way with a bit of a twist that surprises you.
And I mean, that's true not only in out there music
like my own or that of Zappa or Steve Vai
or Buckethead or Christoph Penderecki or something.
It's even there in Mozart or something.
It's not there in elevator music too much,
but that's why it's boring, right?
But wrapped up in there is,
we want to hurt a little bit
so that we can feel the pain go away.
Like we wanna be a little confused by what's coming next.
So then when the thing that comes next
actually makes sense, it's so satisfying, right?
It's the surprising fulfillment of expectations
that we said, so beautifully put.
Is there, we've been skirting around a little bit,
but if I were to ask you the most ridiculous big question
of what is the meaning of life, what would your answer be?
Three values, joy, growth and choice.
I think you need joy.
I mean, that's the basis of everything
if you want the number one value.
On the other hand, I'm unsatisfied
with a static joy that doesn't progress
perhaps because of some elemental element
of human perversity,
but the idea of something that grows
and becomes more and more and better and better
in some sense appeals to me.
But I also sort of like the idea of individuality
that as a distinct system, I have some agencies.
So there's some nexus of causality within this system
rather than the causality being wholly evenly distributed
over the joyous growing mass.
So you start with joy, growth and choice
as three basic values.
Those three things could continue indefinitely.
That's not, that's something that can last forever.
Is there some aspect of something you called
which I like super longevity that you find exciting,
that what, is there, research wise,
is there ideas in that space that?
I mean, I think, yeah, in terms of the meaning of life,
this really ties into that because for us as humans,
probably the way to get the most joy, growth and choice
is transhumanism and to go beyond the human form
that we have right now, right?
I mean, I think human body is great
and by no means to any of us maximize the potential
for joy, growth and choice imminent in our human bodies.
On the other hand, it's clear that other configurations
of matter could manifest even greater amounts
of joy, growth and choice than humans do,
maybe even finding ways to go beyond the realm of matter
that as we understand it right now.
So I think in a practical sense,
much of the meaning I see in human life
is to create something better than humans
and go beyond human life,
but certainly that's not all of it for me
in a practical sense, right?
Like I have four kids and a granddaughter
and many friends and parents and family
and just enjoying everyday human social existence.
But we can do even better.
Yeah, yeah, and I mean, I love,
I've always, when I could live near nature,
I spend a bunch of time out in nature in the forest
and on the water every day and so forth.
So I mean, enjoying the pleasant moment is part of it,
but the, you know, the growth and choice aspect
are severely limited by our human biology.
In particular, dying seems to inhibit your potential
for personal growth considerably as far as we know.
I mean, there's some element of life after death perhaps,
but even if there is,
why not also continue going in this biological realm, right?
In super longevity, I mean, you know,
we haven't yet cured aging, we haven't yet cured death.
Certainly there's very interesting progress all around.
I mean, CRISPR and gene editing can be an incredible tool.
And I mean, right now stem cells
could potentially prolong life a lot.
Like if you got stem cell injections
of just stem cells for every tissue
of your body injected into every tissue
and you can just have replacement of your old cells
with new cells produced by those stem cells.
I mean, that could be highly impactful at prolonging life.
Now we just need slightly better technology
for having them grow, right?
So using machine learning to guide procedures
for stem cell differentiation and trans differentiation,
it's kind of nitty gritty,
but I mean, that's quite interesting.
So I think there's a lot of different things being done
to help with prolongation of human life,
but we could do a lot better.
So for example, the extracellular matrix,
which is the bunch of proteins
in between the cells in your body,
they get stiffer and stiffer as you get older.
And the extracellular matrix transmits information
both electrically, mechanically,
and to some extent, biophotonically.
So there's all this transmission
through the parts of the body,
but the stiffer the extracellular matrix gets,
the less the transmission happens,
which makes your body get worse coordinated
between the different organs as you get older.
So my friend Christian Schaffmeister
at my alumnus organization, my alma mater,
the Great Temple University,
Christian Schaffmeister has a potential solution to this
where he has these novel molecules called spiral ligaments,
which are like polymers that are not organic.
They're specially designed polymers
so that you can algorithmically predict
exactly how they'll fold very simply.
So he designed the molecular scissors
that have spiral ligaments that you could eat
and would then cut through all the glucosapane
and other crosslink proteins
in your extracellular matrix, right?
But to make that technology really work
and be mature as several years of work,
as far as I know, no one's funding it at the moment.
But so there's so many different ways
that technology could be used to prolong longevity.
What we really need, we need an integrated database
of all biological knowledge
about human beings and model organisms,
like based, hopefully a massively distributed
open cog bioadm space,
but it can exist in other forms too.
We need that data to be opened up
in a suitably privacy protecting way.
We need massive funding into machine learning,
AGI, proto AGI statistical research,
aimed at solving biology,
both molecular biology and human biology,
based on this massive data set, right?
And then we need regulators
not to stop people from trying radical therapies
on themselves if they so wish to,
as well as better cloud based platforms
for like automated experimentation
on microorganisms, flies and mice and so forth.
And we could do all this.
You look after the last financial crisis, Obama,
who I generally like pretty well,
but he gave $4 trillion to large banks
and insurance companies.
You know, now in this COVID crisis,
trillions are being spent to help everyday people
and small businesses.
In the end, we probably will find many more trillions
are being given to large banks and insurance companies.
Anyway, like, could the world put $10 trillion
into making a massive holistic bio AI
and bio simulation and experimental biology infrastructure?
We could, we could put $10 trillion into that
without even screwing us up too badly,
just as in the end COVID and the last financial crisis
won't screw up the world economy so badly.
We're not putting $10 trillion into that.
Instead, all the speakers is siloed
inside a few big companies and government agencies.
And most of the data that comes from our individual bodies,
personally, that could feed this AI to solve aging and death,
most of that data is sitting in some hospitals database
doing nothing, right?
I got two more quick questions for you.
One, I know a lot of people are gonna ask me,
you are on the Joe Rogan podcast
wearing that same amazing hat.
Do you have a origin story for the hat?
Is there, does the hat have its own story
that you're able to share?
The hat story has not been told yet.
So we're gonna have to come back
and you can interview the hat.
We'll leave that for the hat's own interview.
It's too much to pack into a few seconds.
Is there a book?
Is the hat gonna write a book?
Okay, we'll.
It may transmit the information
through direct neural transmission.
Okay, so it actually,
there might be some neural link competition there.
Beautiful, we'll leave it as a mystery.
Maybe one last question.
If you build an AGI system, you're successful
at building the AGI system that could lead us
to the singularity and you get to talk to her
and ask her one question, what would that question be?
We're not allowed to ask,
what is the question I should be asking?
Yeah, that would be cheating,
but I guess that's a good question.
I'm thinking of a, I wrote a story with Stefan Bugawans
where these AI developers,
they created a super smart AI
aimed at answering all the philosophical questions
that have been worrying them,
like what is the meaning of life?
Is there free will?
What is consciousness and so forth?
So they got the super AGI built
and it turned a while, it said,
those are really stupid questions.
And then it puts off on a space shift
and left the earth, right?
So you'd be afraid of scaring it off?
That's it, yeah.
I mean, honestly, there is no one question
that rises among all the others really.
I mean, what interests me more
is upgrading my own intelligence
so that I can absorb the whole world view
of the super AGI.
But I mean, of course,
if the answer could be like,
what is the chemical formula for the immortality pill?
Then I would do that or emit a bit string
which will be the code for a super AGI
on the Intel i7 processor.
So those would be good questions.
So if your own mind was expanded
to become super intelligent like you're describing,
I mean, there's kind of a notion
that intelligence is a burden,
that it's possible that with greater and greater intelligence,
that other metric of joy that you mentioned
becomes more and more difficult.
What's your say?
Pretty stupid idea.
So you think if you're super intelligent,
you can also be super joyful?
I think getting root access to your own brain
will enable new forms of joy that we don't have now.
And I think as I've said before,
what I aim at is really make multiple versions of myself.
So I would like to keep one version
which is basically human like I am now,
but keep the dial to turn pain up and down
and get rid of death and make another version
which fuses its mind with super human AGI
and then will become massively transhuman.
And whether it will send some messages back
to the human me or not will be interesting to find out.
The thing is, once you're super AGI,
like one subjective second to a human
might be like a million subjective years
to that super AGI, right?
So it would be on a whole different basis.
And I mean, at very least those two copies
will be good to have, but it could be interesting
to put your mind into a dolphin or a space amoeba
or all sorts of other things.
Or you can imagine one version
that doubled its intelligence every year
and another version that just became a super AGI
as fast as possible, right?
So I mean, now we're sort of constrained
to think one mind, one self, one body, right?
But I think we actually,
we don't need to be that constrained
in thinking about future intelligence
after we've mastered AGI and nanotechnology
and longevity biology.
I mean, then each of our minds
is a certain pattern of organization, right?
And I know we haven't talked about consciousness,
but I sort of, I'm panpsychist.
I sort of view the universe as conscious.
And so, you know, a light bulb or a quark
or an ant or a worm or a monkey
have their own manifestations of consciousness
and the human manifestation of consciousness,
it's partly tied to the particular meat
that we're manifested by,
but it's largely tied to the pattern
of organization in the brain, right?
So if you upload yourself into a computer
or a robot or whatever else it is,
some element of your human consciousness may not be there
because it's just tied to the biological embodiment,
but I think most of it will be there
and these will be incarnations of your consciousness
in a slightly different flavor.
And, you know, creating these different versions
will be amazing.
And each of them will discover meanings of life
that have some overlap,
but probably not total overlap
with the human band's meaning of life.
The thing is to get to that future
where we can explore different varieties of joy,
different variations of human experience and values
and transhuman experiences and values.
To get to that future,
we need to navigate through a whole lot of human bullshit
of companies and governments and killer drones
and making and losing money and so forth, right?
And that's the challenge we're facing now
is if we do things right,
we can get to a benevolent singularity,
which is levels of joy, growth and choice
that are literally unimaginable to human beings.
If we do things wrong,
we could either annihilate all life on the planet
or we could lead to a scenario where, say,
all humans are annihilated
and there's some super AGI that goes on
and does its own thing unrelated to us
except via our role in originating it.
And we may well be at a bifurcation point now, right?
Where what we do now has significant causal impact
on what comes about.
And yet most people on the planet
aren't thinking that way whatsoever.
They're thinking only about their own narrow aims
and aims and goals, right?
No, of course, I'm thinking about my own narrow aims
and goals to some extent also,
but I'm trying to use as much of my energy and mind as I can
to push toward this more benevolent alternative,
which will be better for me,
but also for everybody else.
And that's it.
It's weird that so few people understand what's going on.
I know you interviewed Elon Musk
and he understands a lot of what's going on,
but he's much more paranoid than I am, right?
Because Elon gets that AGI is gonna be
way, way smarter than people.
And he gets that an AGI does not necessarily
have to give a shit about people
because we're a very elementary mode of organization
of matter compared to many AGI's.
But I don't think he has a clear vision
of how infusing early stage AGI's with compassion
and human warmth can lead to an AGI
that loves and helps people
rather than viewing us as a historical artifact
and a waste of mass energy.
But on the other hand,
while I have some disagreements with him,
like he understands way, way more of the story
than almost anyone else
in such a large scale corporate leadership position, right?
It's terrible how little understanding
of these fundamental issues exists out there now
that may be different five or 10 years from now though,
because I can see understanding of AGI and longevity
and other such issues is certainly much stronger
and more prevalent now than 10 or 15 years ago, right?
So I mean, humanity is, as a whole,
can be slow learners relative to what I would like,
but on a historical sense, on the other hand,
you could say the progress is astoundingly fast.
But Elon also said, I think on the Joe Rogan podcast
that love is the answer.
So maybe in that way, you and him are both on the same page
of how we should proceed with AGI.
I think there's no better place to end it.
I hope we get to talk again about the hat
and about consciousness
and about a million topics we didn't cover.
Ben, it's a huge honor to talk to you.
Thank you for making it out.
Thank you for talking today.
I really love it.
Thanks for having me.
This was really good fun
and we dug deep into some very important things.
So thanks for doing this.
Thanks very much.
Awesome.
Thanks for listening to this conversation with Ben Gertzel
and thank you to our sponsors,
The Jordan Harbinger Show and Masterclass.
Please consider supporting the podcast
by going to jordanharbinger.com slash lex
and signing up to masterclass and masterclass.com slash lex.
Click the links, buy the stuff.
It's the best way to support this podcast
and the journey I'm on in my research and startup.
If you enjoy this thing, subscribe on YouTube,
review it with five stars on a podcast,
support it on Patreon or connect with me on Twitter.
Alex Friedman spelled without the E, just F R I D M A N.
I'm sure eventually you will figure it out.
And now let me leave you with some words from Ben Gertzel.
Our language for describing emotions is very crude.
That's what music is for.
Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.